--- page 1 ---
Source depth estimation based on synthetic aperture beamfoming for a moving source
T. C. YangZHM
Citation: J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 138, 1678 (2015); doi: 10.1121/1.4929748
View online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4929748
View Table of Contents: http://asa.scitation.org/toc/jas/138/3
Published by the Acoustical Society of America

--- page 2 ---
Source depth estimation based on synthetic aperture
beamfoming for a moving source
T. C.Y anga)
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China
(Received 30 March 2015; revised 29 June 2015; accepted 14 August 2015; published online 29
September 2015)
A continuous wave signal received on a single hydrophone from a moving source is beamformed
using the synthetic aperture created by the source, where the signal at each range is steered by a
range-dependent phase, relative to the starting point. The range increment (aperture) is determined
based on the Doppler shift estimated from the data, knowing the original signal frequency. Given a
sufﬁcient signal-to-noise ratio, the source depth can be estimated from the beam output, assuming
knowledge of the mode depth functions based on the nominal sound speed and bottom proﬁle in the
area. The method is illustrated with simulated data and at-sea data. For real data, the signal phase
contains a random, incoherent component caused by the (random) source motion and media ﬂuctua-
tions in addition to the deterministic range-dependent component due to source range change. A
phase locked loop is introduced to remove the random component assuming that the random com-
ponent ﬂuctuates faster with time than the range-dependent phase. When a vertical array of
receivers are available covering the depth span of interest, the beam output can be used directly to
estimate the source depth. In this case, no knowledge of the acoustic environment is needed.
VC 2015 Acoustical Society of America.[ http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4929748]
[ZHM] Pages: 1678–1686
I. INTRODUCTION
Acoustic methods for localizing a target, particularly a
submerged target, in an underwater acoustic waveguide are a
topic of great interest. A popular method for estimating the
source range and depth is the matched ﬁeld processing
(MFP)1,2 or matched mode processing (MMP) 3,4 (also
known as modal beamforming), which require a vertical line
array (VLA), or an array with an effective vertical aperture
[such as a horizontal line array (HLA) in the endﬁre direc-
tion5], and also knowledge about the environment [such as
the sound speed proﬁle (SSP) and bottom proﬁle]. Source
localization generally requires simultaneous searches for the
source range and depth using the range-depth ambiguity
function. One often ﬁnds an erroneous estimate of the source
depth given an incorrectly estimated source range and vice
versa, as is the case when high sidelobes are present. The
sidelobe problem is greatly exempliﬁed when the assumed
environment differs from the true environment, referred to
as the environmental mismatch problem. Estimation of the
source depth or range is in general not robust, when the esti-
mation of the one depends on the other.
For some applications, such as determining if a potential
target is submerged or not, an approximate estimation of the
source depth will sufﬁce, with or without knowledge of the
source range. (In passive listening, the source range is often
not known and difﬁcult to estimate.) This is known as the
depth classiﬁcation or discrimination problem. This paper
proposes a method to estimate the source depth of a moving
source, traveling at a constant depth and speed in a range-
independent environment, without knowing the source
range. (The generalization to other cases is outside the scope
of this paper.) It assumes a continuous wave (CW) signal
with a high signal-to-noise ratio and is intended for low fre-
quency signals where the effect of the medium ﬂuctuation is
less signiﬁcant. The method applies array beamforming to
the moving source data, based on the synthetic aperture cre-
ated by the source motion. The signals at various ranges are
multiplied by a range-dependent steering vector; absolute
range is not known. The beam output is used to estimate the
source depth.
The application of synthetic beamforming to estimate
the source depth based on data received on a single receiver
is new, to be the best of the author’s knowledge. As
remarked above, in order to estimate the source depth using
the MFP or MMP, one needs a VLA, and must know or
search for the source range. In order to estimate the source
range using a normal mode propagation model, one must
know the mode wavenumbers to a high precision (e.g., the
third or fourth decimal point). The mode wavenumbers are
sensitive to the sound speed changes, and hence MFP/MMP
requires precise and timely knowledge of the SSP and (prior)
knowledge of the ocean bottom, else the results are often
unreliable (the environmental mismatch problem). The pro-
posed method does not require knowledge of, nor needs to
estimate the source range, hence it is thus more robust than
the MFP or MMP method. It does require knowledge of the
mode depth functions. For approximate depth estimation, the
mode depth functions based on the nominal sound speed and
bottom proﬁle will often sufﬁce. The proposed method,
developed for a single receiver, can be extended to a VLA
(Sec.IV B). In this case, the source depth is estimated
directly from the beam output as a function of depth. No
knowledge of the environment is needed.a)Electronic mail: tsihyang@gmail.com
1678 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 138 (3), September 2015 0001-4966/2015/138(3)/1678/9/$30.00 VC 2015 Acoustical Society of America

--- page 3 ---
II. SYNTHETIC APERTURE MODAL BEAMFORMING
We shall consider a range-independent environment and
assume that the source moves away from the receiver at a
constant speed during the observation time. The source range
is unknown and its depth can be slowly changing with time;
for the present discussion we shall assume it is at a ﬁxed
depth. We assume that the source radiates a tonal signal, and
the source speed can be estimated based on the Doppler
shifts of the signal, v¼ C(Df/f), whereC is the average sound
speed, Df is the Doppler shift, andf is the known source fre-
quency. The received data as a function of time are implic-
itly related to the source range byr ¼ r1 þ vt, wherer1 is the
unknown source range att ¼ 0. During the observation time
T, the source travels a distanceDR ¼ vT, which is known
and is the aperture of the synthetic array. The pressure ﬁeld
at different ranges is beamformed as follows:
gk r; zrðÞ ¼ eip=4
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ2pkr
p
ðr2
r1
pr ; zrðÞ eikr rSrðÞ dr; krr1 /C29 1;
(1)
where p(r, zr) is the signal received at a receiver at a depthzr
and ranger ¼ r1 þ vt, wheret ¼ tn, for thenth block of data,
eikrr is the steering vector, andS(r) is the weighting coefﬁ-
cient for the data (known as the array shading coefﬁcient for
plane wave beamforming). The functionS(r) is intended to
compensate for the spreading loss and will be determined
from data using
SðrÞ¼h j pðr; zrÞj2i/C0 1=2; (2)
where the angular bracketshi denote range averaging and/or
smoothing operation. Note that if the source range is known,
by settingSðrÞ¼ ﬃﬃrp , Eq. (1) reduces to the Hankel trans-
form.6 In this case,g(kr, zr) is known as the depth-dependent
Green’s function. Range averaging/smoothing is required in
the present case to obtain an approximateﬃﬃrp dependence as
discussed in Sec.III. Errors induced by this approximation
will be evaluated using simulated data.
To guide the discussions, let us express the pressure
ﬁeld in terms of the normal modes as follows:
pr ; zrðÞ ¼
XM
m¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
kmr
r
/m zsðÞ /m zrðÞ e/C0 ikmr/C0 amr/C0 ip=4; (3)
where /m(z) is the mode depth function,km is the mode wave-
number andam is the mode attenuation coefﬁcient. Assuming
that S(r) is approximately proportional toﬃﬃrp , one ﬁnds, after
substituting the normal mode expression into Eq.(1),t h a t
gk r; zrðÞ ’
XM
m¼1
/m zsðÞ /m zrðÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃkrkm
p
ðr2
r1
eik r/C0 kmðÞ r/C0 amrdr
¼
XM
m¼1
am
/m zsðÞ /m zrðÞ
kr /C0 km /C0 iam
; (4)
where am ¼½ eiðkr/C0 kmÞr2/C0 amr2 /C0 eiðkr /C0 kmÞr1/C0 amr1 /C138 =ikm. The wave-
number spectrum g(kr, zr) has many peaks at the modal
wavenumbers.6,7 The spectral peak atkr ¼ km is given by
gðkm; zrÞ¼ bm/mðzrÞ; (5)
where bm ¼ð 2e/C0 amr0 Þ=ðamkmÞsinh½ðamDRÞ=2/C138 /mðzsÞ is a real
number, withr0 /C17 (r2 þ r1)/2. Realizing thatbm contains in-
formation about the source depth zs, we deﬁne a source-
depth ambiguity function for a single receiver by
DzðÞ ¼
/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12
XM
m¼1
/m zðÞ gk m; zrðÞ
/C22/m zrðÞ
/C12/C12/C12/C12/C12
2
; (6)
where /C22/mðzrÞ is a regularized mode depth function given by
/C22/
/C0 1
m ðzrÞ¼½ /mðzrÞ/C138 =½/2
mðzrÞþ D2/C138 , whereD is chosen empir-
ically (on the order of one tenth of the maximum value of
the mode depth functions) to prevent blow up of the inverse
mode depth function at zero-crossing points. In this approach
(given only a single receiver), the mode depth function
/m(z) will be estimated using a nominal SSP; no knowledge
of mode wavenumbers is required. Note that the mode depth
functions are insensitive to the sound speed ﬂuctuations over
the observation time, and the ones estimated from the nomi-
nal SSP are generally good enough for coarse estimation of
the source depth. [The depth estimation error is due to mis-
match between the calculated mode depth functions/m(zs)
and the true mode source depth functions bm /C24 /data
m ðzsÞ
at the source depth. The depth ambiguity functions
j PM
m¼1 /mðzÞ/mðzsÞj2 and j PM
m¼1 /mðzÞ/data
m ðzsÞj2 differ
slightly in shape since /m (zs) and /data
m ðzsÞ are real and
insensitive to the sound speed variations. Consequently, one
expects a “small or moderate” error in the source depth esti-
mation. In practice, the depth resolution is limited by the
hydrophone spacing (due to ﬁnite number of receivers used),
which is often larger than the depth estimation error due to
SSP uncertainty.] To compare the depth distributions for
sources at different depths, we deﬁne a normalized depth
distribution function, given by Eq.(6) divided by the sum of
D(z) over the depth grids or sample points used in the depth
search/estimation.
The above method is illustrated using simulated data
given in Ref.7 for a downward refractive SSP. (The readers
are referred to Ref.7 for details.) We consider two sources,
one at depth of 50 m, referred to as the deep source, and
another at a depth of 4 m, referred to as the shallow source
and one receiver. To study the performance as a function of
the receiver depth, we consider two cases: the ﬁrst case
involves a receiver located at a depth of 70 m, and the second
case considers a receiver located at a depth 18 m. Assume
each source moves away from the receiver with a speed of
5 kn, transmitting a narrowband signal at 350 Hz. (The wave-
number estimation is governed by the synthetic aperture, not
the speed.) We will calculate the depth ambiguity function
based on data received from each source and determine
whether one can discriminate the deep source against the
shallow source. In the simulation, we assume that the source
starts out at a range of 5010 m, but this information is
unknown to the receiver, nor is it critical (see discussions in
the following paragraph). The received pressure ﬁeld is
sampled every second.7 The pressure ﬁeld data sampled over
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.138 (3), September 2015 T. C. Y ang 1679

--- page 4 ---
time, covering a range span of 4990 m, are used to estimate
the wavenumber spectrum for each receiver using Eq.(1).
The wavenumber spectrum estimated using Eq.(1) for a re-
ceiver at 70 m depth is shown in Fig.1(a) for each of the two
sources; the symbols “þ” denote the true mode wavenum-
bers used to identify the mode number for each spectral
peak. Figure1(a) shows that the deep source (solid lines)
and shallow source (dashed lines) excite different groups of
modes, providing the basis for depth classiﬁcation. To esti-
mate the source depth, we calculate the depth ambiguity
functions, Eq.(6), based on the wavenumber spectrum
deduced from a single receiver data. We assume knowledge
of the mode depth functions, which are calculated using the
given SSP (Fig. 1, Ref.7). The normalized depth distribution
functions for the deep and shallow sources are shown in
Fig.2(a) for the receiver at a depth zr¼ 70 m. One ﬁnds that
the depths of the two sources are correctly estimated based
on the depth distribution functions. For the receiver at a
depth zr¼ 18 m, the normalized depth distribution functions
are shown in Fig.2(b). The distribution for the deep source
has higher sidelobes, but the source depth is still reliably
estimated.
How is the performance inﬂuenced by the unknown ini-
tial source range? One notes that sources at different ranges
will excite modes somewhat differently since mode attenua-
tions are range-dependent. For synthetic beamforming, the
dependence on the initial source range is throughe/C0 amr0 in
bm [see the derivation leading to Eq. (5)]. Consider, for
example, two different data sets where the source travels the
same range span but starts out at different initial ranges,r1
and r0
1. One ﬁnds that the spectral terms are related by
bmðr0
1Þ¼ bmðr1Þeamðr0
1/C0 r1Þ. In practice, jr0
1 /C0 r1j is on the
order of km or less (depending on the detection range). For
the simulated data,am is on the order of 10/C0 4–10/C0 5 for the
low (<10) order modes. For these modes, one ﬁnds that
bmðr0
1Þ’ bmðr1Þ. For the high (10–20) order modes,bm may
change by /C24 30% for jr0
1 /C0 r1j/C24 4 km, but these modes are
weakly excited and the effect on mode depth function is
negligible.
III. SWellEx96 DATA ANALYSIS
The SWellEx96 experiment was conducted near San
Diego, CA in the spring of 1996. The environmental infor-
mation and data are available online.8 In this section, we an-
alyze 35 min of data, 5 min after the start of event S5, in
which the source-ship traveled along an isobath of a mildly
sloping environment at a distance from 8 to 3 km from the
receiving VLA.8 The water depth was approximately 210 m.
The data analyzed involved two tonal signals, one at 127 Hz
projected by a shallow source (zs¼ 9 m), and the other at
130 Hz projected by a deep source (zs¼ 54 m). The data
were received simultaneously on a VLA. We shall focus on
the signals received on the bottom most hydrophone on the
VLA to see how well the proposed method can estimate the
two source depths. We assume knowledge of the mode depth
functions, which are calculated based on the SSP observed
during this event.8
As remarked in Ref. 7, real data requires signal pre-
conditioning as it is unrealistic to expect a ship to travel with
a constant (radial) velocity over a long time. The motions by
the surface waves are known to induce instantaneous accel-
eration and deceleration on the ship, causing jittering motion
on the sources towed behind. Based on the GPS data, the
range from the ship to the VLA is shown in Fig.3(a) for the
time period of interest. The data were interpolated (using the
Matlab interpolation program) to calculate the velocity as
shown in Fig.3(b). While the estimated velocity may not be
FIG. 1. (Color online) Modal wave-
number spectra estimated using syn-
thetic aperture beamforming based on
signals from a shallow (zs¼ 4m ) a n d
deep (zs¼ 50 m) source: (a) for a single
receiver at 70 m depth, and (b) summed
over the VLA. The “þ” symbols denote
the true modal wavenumbers.
FIG. 2. (Color online) Normalized
depth ambiguity functions for the shal-
low (zs¼ 4 m) and deep (zs¼ 50 m)
sources using data collected: (a) from a
single receiver at 70 m depth, (b) from
a single receiver at 18 m depth, and (c)
using a VLA.
1680 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 138 (3), September 2015 T. C. Y ang

--- page 5 ---
accurate, it does indicate that the ship encounters instantane-
ous acceleration and deceleration.
For the source traveling with a constant (radial) veloc-
ity, the range change is known to induce a linearly time-
varying signal phase, known as the Doppler shift. Random
instantaneous acceleration and deceleration on the source
introduce a (oscillating) time-varying phase on the projected
signal, leading to Doppler broadening of the signal fre-
quency.9 The random phase (for even a small amount of
Doppler broadening) can severely degrade the ability to esti-
mate/resolve the mode wavenumbers using the synthetic
aperture beamforming method. The same data were proc-
essed by Walkeret al.9 who addressed the effect of radial
source accelerations on the estimation of modal frequency
shifts. They found “Doppler broadening due to radial source
accelerations degrades the effectiveness of the (mode)
extraction method,” requiring a technique to compensate for
Doppler broadening in order to recover the original signal
phase for a source moving with a constant (radial) velocity.
The ﬂuctuating ocean media also introduce a random
phase on the received signal. The random media effects on
sound propagation are expected to be not so signiﬁcant at low
frequencies. (MFP assumes that the signal phases between the
receivers can be modeled as a function of depth using the so
called replica ﬁeld.) We assume that the phase distortion due
to jittering source motion and the random media vary rela-
tively fast with time, faster than the phase change due to
source range change, which varies slowly with time for a
source traveling at a low speed. To remove the random (oscil-
lating) phase, we propose: (1) a second order phase locked
loop (PLL)10 to estimate the time varying phase of the tonal
signal ~hðtÞ,d e ﬁ n e db ypðtÞ¼ Pe/C0 i2pfctþi~hðtÞ,w h e r eP is treated
as a constant, and (2) a low pass ﬁlter to remove the oscillat-
ing/jittering phase, yielding/C22hðtÞ, and an estimate of the ran-
dom phase^hðtÞ¼ ~hðtÞ/C0 /C22hðtÞ. The PLL has been widely used
in radio, telecommunications, computers and other electronic
applications. In earlier days, it was implemented with a vari-
able frequency oscillator and a phase detector. The oscillator
generates a periodic signal. The phase detector compares the
phase of that signal with the phase of the input periodic signal
and adjusts the oscillator to keep the phases as closely
matched with the input signal as possible. Through the feed-
back loop it tracks the phase between the input and output sig-
nal. Today, the PLL is mostly implemented digitally. In this
work, we shall use a second order phase locked loop which
employs a proportional tracking coefﬁcientK1 and an integral
tracking coefﬁcientK2 as given below
~hðn þ 1Þ¼ ~hðnÞþ K1uðnÞþ K2
Xn
m¼0
uðmÞ; (7)
where u(m) is the phase error between the input signal (data)
and the oscillator at timem, and ~hðnÞ is the output phase.
We use K1 ¼ 0.001 and K2 ¼ 0.0001 as commonly used in
underwater acoustic communications.11
The data are ﬁrst processed by Fourier analysis to esti-
mate the Doppler shift for each tonal signal. One ﬁnds an av-
erage Doppler shift of/C24 0.21 Hz, yielding a target speed of
2.42 m/s which is consistent with the estimated speed of
2.43 m/s based on GPS log. For each signal of interest,
applying a band pass ﬁlter centered on the Doppler-shifted
frequency, with a bandwidth of 1 Hz, we obtain a time series
for the corresponding (narrowband) signal, upon which we
next apply the phase locked loop and a low pass ﬁlter to
remove the phase jitter. Figures3(c) and 3(d) show the phase
as a function of time over two different time scales for the
127 Hz signal—the phase time series measured using the
PLL are shown by wiggly lines, and the ﬁltered phase time
series are shown by the smooth lines. The rapid phase
change (with period<0.2 min) is attributed to the source
FIG. 3. (Color online) (a) Ship range
to the VLA as a function of time. (b)
Velocity of the ship deduced from (a).
(c) and (d) Phase of the 127 Hz signal
for two different time periods; wriggly
lines show the original phase and
smooth lines show the ﬁltered phase.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.138 (3), September 2015 T. C. Y ang 1681

--- page 6 ---
motion and media ﬂuctuation and is low pass ﬁltered. The
ﬁltered phase is used to construct the ﬁltered signal time se-
ries from moving source as if it were moving at a constant
speed. The time series is divided into blocks, each with 4096
samples, with a time duration of/C24 2.73 s, corresponding to a
range increment ofDr ’ 6:63 m. The pressure ﬁeldp(rn, zr)
is next estimated for each block of data [to be used as input
to Eq.(1)] according to the procedure given in the
Appendix, where rn ¼ r1 þ nDr, with an unknown initial
range r1. The Appendix also provides an error analysis. To
estimate S(r) in Eq.(1), the signal intensityjp(rn, zr)j2 was
range averaged to produce a smooth curve. It was then ﬁtted
in the log domain by a linear function. The resultingS(r)i s
used in Eq. (1) to compensate for the spreading loss. The
above processing is applied to the 127 and 130 Hz signals
separately. The resulting wavenumber spectra using Eq.(1)
and the depth distribution functions using Eq.(6) will be pre-
sented below.
To guide the data analysis, we ﬁrst create simulated data
for event S5 assuming a source run with a range span of
/C245 km using the SWellEx96 environment as posted on the
website.8 Figure 4(a) shows the mode wavenumber spectra
deduced from the simulated data received on a sensor at the
ocean bottom for the 127 Hz signal projected by the shallow
(zs¼ 9 m) source and the 130 Hz signal projected by the
deep (zs¼ 54 m) source. Figure4(b) shows the normalized
depth distribution function based on the single-receiver algo-
rithm, Eq.(6), for both signals. As expected, the depth ambi-
guity function for the 127 Hz signal shows a peak at a depth
of /C24 10 m and the depth ambiguity function for the 130 Hz
signal shows a peak at/C24 56 m in agreement with the true
source depth (within the depth resolution). Next we present
the result using the SWellEx96 data. Figure4(c) shows the
mode wavenumber spectra estimated from the bottom-most
receiver for both signals using Eq.(1). Figure4(d) shows the
corresponding normalized depth distribution functions using
Eq. (6) for both signals. One ﬁnds that the depth ambiguity
function at 127 Hz peaks at 8 m and the depth ambiguity
function at 130 Hz peaks at 38 m. The source depths of the
two signals seem to be separately estimated. Note that to cal-
culate the depth ambiguity function using Eq.(6), one needs
to identify the mode number associated with the spectral
peaks—some spectral peaks are treated as sidelobes and not
selected. We use the calculated modal wavenumber spec-
trum (based on simulated data) as a guide to help with the
mode identiﬁcation. We note that the mode wavenumber
decreases monotonically with the mode number. The abso-
lute value of the difference of the mode wavenumbers
between adjacent modes increases monotonically with the
mode number for the low order (e.g., 1–20) modes.
Although the mode wavenumbers are not precisely known
due to uncertainty in the SSP and bottom, the mode wave-
number differences (between the adjacent modes) and the
rate of increase are approximately known (to the ﬁrst valid
digit). [For the present case, the mode wavenumber differ-
ence increases approximately linearly with the mode number
for the low order (<20) modes.] Now, if the ﬁrst mode is
excited (as for a submerged target), since the ﬁrst mode has
the largest wavenumber, the right most spectral peak in the
data will be associated with the ﬁrst mode. As an example,
compare the solid line in Fig.4(c) with that in Fig. 4(a).
Once the ﬁrst mode is identiﬁed, the rest follows naturally
(by matching the data with the simulated data by the rate of
increase of the mode wavenumber differences). If only
higher order modes are excited (as for a surface ship), one
can identify the modes by estimating the wavenumber spac-
ing, and matching that with the calculated mode wavenum-
ber spacing. This mode identiﬁcation process involves
(admittedly) an educated guess since the wavenumber spac-
ing (and its rate of increase) is not precisely known. (For a
FIG. 4. (Color online) Modal wave-
number spectra for (a) simulated data
and (c) at-sea data. Normalized depth
ambiguity functions estimated using
(b) simulated data and (d) at-sea data.
The shallow source (zs ¼ 9 m) trans-
mitted a tonal signal at 127 Hz and the
deep (zs¼ 54 m) source transmitted a
tonal signal at 130 Hz.
1682 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 138 (3), September 2015 T. C. Y ang

--- page 7 ---
crude estimate of the depth error, we note that mode identiﬁ-
cation error between then and m modes is expected to pro-
duce a depth estimation error on the order of H/n–H/m,
where H is the water depth. Which mode is in error is case-
dependent, so is the sensitivity analysis.) Also, as discussed
in the Appendix, one ﬁnds that the measured wavenumbers
are subject to the uncertainty in the Doppler shift estimation.
In the data analysis, we identify the modes by ﬁne-tuning the
residue Doppler shift (or shifting the measured wavenumber
spectrum up or down the wavenumber axis) until one
achieves a good match (correlation) between the data spec-
trum and calculated wavenumber spectrum. In practice, one
can use the signals from either an augmented source or a
known surface ship as training data to help the mode
identiﬁcation.
Comparing the depth ambiguity function estimated
from data [Fig. 4(d)] with that estimated from the model
[Fig. 4(b)], one ﬁnds the peak at 8 m in the data is smaller
than that shown in the simulation. The reason is because
there is an aliased peak close to the ocean bottom in the
depth ambiguity function estimated from the data (not shown
here). It seems that a near-surface and near-ocean-bottom
source excites similar groups of modes which are resolved in
simulated data but not so in the at-sea data. In that case, one
will have a “grating” lobe. In practice, this is not likely to
present a problem as no moving target is expected near the
ocean bottom. For the deep source, one notices that the depth
ambiguity function has only one peak; the source is
“uniquely” localized. Comparing the performance, one ﬁnds
that the main lobe level in the data [Fig.4(d)] is somewhat
lower than that found in the simulation [Fig.4(b)]. This is
because the real data have more sidelobes [Fig.4(d)]. Note
the horizontal scales in Figs. 4(b) and 4(d) are slightly
different.
IV. SYSTEM IMPLICATIONS
A. HLA
The above method assumes a strong signal. The method
can in principle be applied to a weak signal given a HLA,
whereby the signal is enhanced by array gain when steered
to the target direction (bearing). This creates an ability for
the HLA to distinguish a submerged target from a surface
ship (even) in the broadside directions of the array. This
capability did not exist before.
B. VLA
Given a VLA that spans the water column, one can
apply synthetic beamforming to the moving source data for
each receiver. In this case, one ﬁnds that the source depth
can be estimated directly from data without any knowledge
of the mode depth function nor the SSP. For a VLA of many
receivers, the weighting coefﬁcient in Eq.(1) will be esti-
mated using
SðrÞ¼
*/C20 XN
j¼1
jpðr; zjÞj2Dz
/C21 +/C0 1=2
: (8)
In this case, one ﬁndsSðrÞ/C24 ﬃﬃrp ignoring small corrections
due to differences in mode attenuation coefﬁcients.7 The
source-depth ambiguity function is given by the beam power
for each receiver. Using Eq.(5), one ﬁnds
DðzjÞ¼
/C12/C12/C12/C12
XM
m¼1
gðkm; zjÞ
/C12/C12/C12/C12
2
¼
/C12/C12/C12/C12
XM
m¼1
/mðzjÞ/mðzsÞdm
/C12/C12/C12/C12
2
;
j ¼ 1;2;3;… ;N; (9)
where zj is the receiver depth of thejth hydrophone, anddm
¼ð 2e/C0 amr0 Þ=ðamkmÞsinh½ðamDRÞ=2/C138 is referred to as the
mode shading coefﬁcient.13 Equation (9) shows that the
depth ambiguity function is related in theory to the mode
depth functions and can be used to estimate the source depth;
it is related to the MFP/MMP depth function evaluated at the
depths of the receivers as shown below in the subsection,
Sec. IV B 1. Experimentally, the depth ambiguity will be
obtained by performing the synthetic aperture beamforming
analysis on the received data for each hydrophone. The spec-
tral energy [the second term of Eq.(9)] is displayed as a
function of the hydrophone depth. The depth where the depth
ambiguity function is the largest is the estimated source
depth. No mode depth functions are used in this analysis,
hence no knowledge of the propagation environment is
required. To estimate the probability distribution function of
the source depth, we deﬁneP(zjzs) ¼ KD(z), forz ¼ zj, j ¼ 1,
2, 3,…, N, where K ¼½PN
j¼1 DðzjÞ/C138 /C0 1 is a normalization
factor. The depth resolution is limited by the receiver separa-
tionDz.
The above method is illustrated using simulated data
given in Ref.7 (See Sec.II and Ref.7 for details.) The VLA
contains 20 element spaced at 4 m covering the water col-
umn from 2 to 80 m. The wavenumber spectrum, Eq.(1)
summed over all receivers, is shown in Fig.1(b) as a func-
tion of wavenumber. The normalized depth ambiguity func-
tion is shown in Fig. 2(c) for both the deep and shallow
sources. Again, the depth ambiguity functions are deduced
directly from the simulated data without assuming any
knowledge of the SSP and/or the bottom proﬁle. This
method can also be applied to multiple receivers deployed at
different depths, but not necessarily at the same location
(such as a slanted VLA), since the data are independently
processed. To estimate the source depth, the depth span of
the receivers should cover the depth where the target is
expected to travel, and be sufﬁciently wide to see a distribu-
tion. (The target depth should be within the search depths.)
For SWellEx96 data, the receiving VLA is located at the
lower half of the water column whereas the towed source is
in the upper half of the water column. The model-
independent depth estimation method, Eq. (9), cannot be
applied here.
1. Relation with the MFP
In this section, Eq.(9) will be shown to be the similar to
the matched-mode ambiguity function evaluated at the source
range. Recall the matched-moderange-depth ambiguity function
given by3 DMMPðr; zÞ¼ ðr=2pÞj PM
m¼1½Arplc
m ðr; zÞ/C138 /C3 Adata
m j2,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.138 (3), September 2015 T. C. Y ang 1683

--- page 8 ---
where Adata
m ¼ PN
j¼1 /mðzjÞpðrs; zjÞDz is themth mode ampli-
tude estimated from the data,p(rs, zj) is the pressure ﬁeld on a
receiver at depthzj from a source at rangers, Dz is the phone
spacing, and Arplc
m ðr; zÞ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð2p=rkmÞ
p
/mðzÞeikmr is the mth
mode amplitude of the replica ﬁeld for a hypothetical source
located at (r, z), wherekm is the complex wavenumber for the
mth mode. Given a VLA spanning the water column, perform-
ing the mode decomposition using the mode orthogonality
condition, one obtains Adata
m ðr; zÞ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð2p=rkmÞ
p
/mðzsÞeikmrs .
If the source range is correctly estimated,r ¼ rs, one ﬁnds
DMMPðr ¼ rs; zÞ¼
/C12/C12/C12/C12
XM
m¼1
/mðzÞ/mðzsÞd0
m
/C12/C12/C12/C12
2
; (10)
where d0
m /C17 e/C0 2amrs =km. One notes that the depth ambiguity
function of the proposed method, Eq.(9), is similar to the
matched-mode ambiguity function evaluated at the source
range, Eq.(10). The difference lies in the use of the mode
shading coefﬁcients, which modiﬁes the shape of the distribu-
tion function and usually does not impact (the accuracy of)
the depth estimation. (The same is true for MFP given a large
aperture VLA.) However, as remarked above, to estimate the
source depth, one must estimate the source range ﬁrst or
search for range and depth simultaneously, which requires
knowing the mode wavenumbers to a high precision (third
decimal point). As the mode wavenumbers are very sensitive
to the environmental acoustic inputs, when the calculated
mode wavenumbersk0
m does not match the true wavenumbers
km, the MFP/MMP depth ambiguity function becomes
DMMPðr ¼rs;zÞ¼j PM
m¼1 /mðzÞ/mðzsÞeiðk0
m/C0 kmÞrs/C0 2amrs =kmj2.
In this case, the depth ambiguity function is still a function of
the mode wavenumbers, and has the environmental mismatch
problem. Likewise, when the assumed source range is differ-
ent from the true source range, the MMP/MFP depth ambigu-
ity function is a function of the mode wavenumbers (with or
without environmental mismatch) and is expected to yield a
wrong source depth. In comparison, the proposed method, Eq.
(9), does not requires knowledge of the source range and is
not an explicit function of the mode wavenumbers.
C. Requirements and resolution
The above analyses are based on Eq.(1), which is often
referred to as the conventional (synthetic range) beamform-
ing. Conventional (synthetic range) beamforming usually
requires a large range span; to resolve the wavenumbers
between the n and mth modes, the range needs to be larger
than the mode interference distanceknm ¼ 2p/(kn /C0 km). One
ﬁnds, for example, k12 /C24 2.3 km; higher order modes
requires a smaller mode interference distance to resolve
them. Practical problems may present data with a short range
span, e.g., 1 km, for which one must apply the high resolu-
tion algorithms,12 which are capable of resolving modes
with a less range span but may have the snapshot deﬁcient
problem. Data with a short range span can often be consid-
ered range-independent, presenting an additional incentive
for the high resolution algorithms.
Similarly, Eqs.(6), (9),o r(10) belongs to a class of the
Bartlett processor. The depth resolution is in this case deter-
mined by the mode vertical wavenumbers, and has been
widely studied in the literature for various environments,
including that using MFP/MMP. To improve the depth reso-
lution, one can also apply a high resolution method.13 These
topics will be pursued in future work.
V. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSIONS
A method for estimating the source depth is presented
for a single receiver based on the synthetic aperture created
by a moving source relative to the receiver. The received sig-
nal as a function of range is steered by a range-dependent
phase and beamformed. The beamformed output yields the
modal wavenumber spectrum; the spectral peaks contain in-
formation about the source depth. A source–depth ambiguity
function is proposed by multiplying the modal spectral peaks
with the mode depth functions, given proper identiﬁcation of
the modes. Note that the mode depth function is insensitive
to SSP variations. Mode depth functions calculated using the
nominal SSP is found good enough for coarse estimation of
the source depth.
This method is tested with simulated data, and real data
with reasonable success; for the latter, we choose the
SWellex96 data with a sufﬁciently high SNR. For real data,
the source jittering motion (due to ocean waves) is known to
introduce instantaneous acceleration and deceleration, inject-
ing a random phase to the signal. This creates Doppler spread
for a CW signal, and severely impacts the performance of
synthetic beamforming. In this paper, a PLL is used to remove
the random phase components of the signal due to source jit-
tering motion and random media ﬂuctuations. Modal wave-
number spectrum is reasonably recovered from the data.
Given a VLA covering the (upper) water column includ-
ing the depths where the source is expected to travel, the
beam power from individual hydrophones yields the depth
ambiguity function as a function of depth. No information
on the environment, such as SSP or bottom proﬁle is needed.
In other words, it is free of the environmental mismatch
problem.
As remarked in the Introduction, to estimate the source
depth using MMP, or MFP, one needs to estimate the source
range and depth simultaneously, else one must know the
source range to determine the source depth and vice versa.
The advantage of the proposed method, Eqs.(6) or (9),i s
that the source range is not known nor is it a required input.
The disadvantage of this method is that it requires a moving
source traveling a sufﬁcient radial distance whereas MMP/
MFP can be applied to a ﬁxed as well as a moving source.
More effort is needed for application to real world problems
as remarked in Sec.IV, which is left for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work was initiated when the author was at the
National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. The
work is supported by the Taiwan National Science Council
grant 101-2218-E-110-001, and the Pao Yu-Kong Foundation,
Zhejiang, China.
1684 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 138 (3), September 2015 T. C. Y ang

--- page 9 ---
APPENDIX: ESTIMATING THE NARROWBAND
SPECTRAL DENSITY FOR A MOVING SOURCE
The time series for a narrowband signal can be
expressed as follows:
pr ; z0; tðÞ ¼ btðÞ
XM
m¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
kmr
r
/m zsðÞ /m z0ðÞ
/C2 e/C0 i 2pfct/C0 kmrðÞ /C0 amr/C0 ip=4 þ ntðÞ ; (A1)
where fc is the signal frequency,b(t) is a random variable
reﬂecting the effect of the random medium and the source
motion, andn(t) denotes the ambient noise. Dividing the
data into blocks, each with a durationT and containing L
samples, i.e., T ¼ LDt, where Dt is the sample duration, one
can express time for the lth sample in the nth block as
tn.l ¼ Tn þ lDt, whereTn /C17 nT, l¼ 1, 2, …, L. For a moving
source with a radial velocity of v, the range can be expressed
asrn,l ¼ rn þ lDr, wherern ¼ vTn and Dr ¼ vDt. The time se-
ries for a moving source can be expressed as14
pr ;z0;tn;lðÞ ’eih tn;lðÞ
XM
m¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
kmrn
r
/m zsðÞ /m z0ðÞ
/C2 e/C0 i 2pfcTn/C0 kmrnðÞ /C0 amrn/C0 ip=4e/C0 i2pfD lDtðÞ þnt n;lðÞ ;
(A2)
where fD ¼ fc(1 þ v/c) is the Doppler shifted frequency. In
deriving Eq.(A2), we have: (1) assumed a constant Doppler
shift for the dominant modes, namely,kmDr ’ 2pfcðv=cÞDt;
where c ¼ 2pfc=/C22km, /C22km is wavenumber averaged over the
dominant modes; (2) expressedbðtÞ¼j bjeihðtÞ, and assumed
jbj’ 1, since the amplitude varies much more slowly with
phase, and has a small effect on the spectral estimation com-
pared with the phase; and (3) approximatede/C0 amðlDrÞ ’ 1,
since l < L and amLDr /C28 1. As stated in the text, we assume
that the random phaseh(t) is caused by source jittering motion
and random medium and can be ﬁltered out by the PLL.
Applying PLL to estimate the random phase^hðtÞ (see
Sec. III) and carrying out the Fourier transform for thenth
block of data (for a givenrn), one obtains an estimate of the
pressure ﬁeld,
~pr n; z0; fðÞ ¼
XL
l¼1
ei2pft n:l e/C0 i^h tn;lðÞ pr n;l; tn;lðÞ
/C16/C17
¼ ei2p f /C0 fcðÞ Tn
XL
l¼1
ei2pfl DtðÞ e/C0 i2pfD lDtðÞ eiDh tn;lðÞ
/C2
XM
m¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
kmr
r
/m zsðÞ /m z0ðÞ eikmrn/C0 amrn/C0 ip=4 ;
(A3)
where ^hðtn;lÞ is the estimated phase, and Dhðtn;lÞ¼ hðtn;lÞ
/C0 ^hðtn;lÞ is the phase estimation error. One then ﬁnds for
f ¼ f0,
~pðrn; z0; fDÞ¼ Lei2pðDf ÞTn eiDhðTnÞpðrn; z0Þ; (A4)
where Df ¼ fD – fc is the Doppler frequency shift, andp(rn, z0)
is pressure ﬁeld given in Eq.(3), and we have approximated
the phase error, assuming it is small, using PL
l¼1 eiDhðtn;lÞ
’ LeiDhðTnÞ,w h e r eDhðTnÞ¼ð 1=LÞ PL
l¼1 Dhðtn;lÞ.E q u a t i o n
(A4) states that the pressure ﬁeldp (rn, z0) can be estimated
from the moving source data, block by block, by correcting
for the Doppler phase for each block using
e/C0 i2pðDf ÞTn ~pðrn; z0; fDÞ, if there is no error in the random phase
estimation, Dh ¼ 0. The pressure ﬁeldp(rn, z0) can then be
used to estimate the mode wavenumber spectrum using Eq.
(1)as demonstrated in Sec.III.
One ﬁnds that the mode wavenumber spectrum in real
data processing is sensitive to small errors in the estimation
of the Doppler shift, since a small change/error inDf, e.g.,
d(Df) ¼ 0.05 Hz, produces a large phase shiftd(Df)Tn over a
long time period. While the shape (or the mode structure) of
the wavenumber spectrum remains unchanged for different
Df, or different sizes of Fourier transform, the mode wave-
numbers (theposition of the spectrum) are sensitive to small
changes in Df. This is because a linear phase shift with
respect to range (time) produces a delay shift in the wave-
number. In this regard, one notes that the slope of the ﬁltered
phase in Fig.3(c) or Fig.3(d) is about 1.1 times smaller than
that expected from the estimated Doppler shift—the differ-
ence is partially due to unwrapping errors [see phase jumps
in Fig.3(c)] as well as uncertainty in the Doppler estimation.
Second, in the above derivation we have assumed a constant
Doppler shift for all the (dominant) modes, but in reality, dif-
ferent modes have slightly different Doppler shifts, produc-
ing effectively a (small) Doppler spread. The Doppler shift
estimated from the spectrum has an uncertainty on the order
of the maximum of the Doppler spread and the inverse of the
Fourier transform window. For the present caseDf is known
to the ﬁrst decimal point but not precisely known to the sec-
ond decimal point.
Equation (6) was used to estimate the source depth.
Note that Eq.(6) uses only the spectrum amplitudes not the
corresponding mode wavenumbers. To use Eq. (6), one
needs to associate the spectrum peaks with the proper modes.
To do so, one can adjust the Doppler shift until the measured
spectrum grossly lines up with the modeled spectrum—as
remarked above the spectrum itself (the structure of the
modes and the mode amplitudes) is insensitive to the
Doppler shift error. While there is an uncertainty in estimat-
ing the mode wavenumbers it will not affect the depth esti-
mation so long as modes are properly identiﬁed (using the
simulated wavenumber spectrum as a guide).
1A. B. Baggeroer, W. A. Kuperman, and P. N. Mikhalevsky, “An overview
of matched ﬁeld methods in ocean acoustics,”IEEE J. Oceanic Eng.18,
401–424 (1993).
2A. Tolstoy, Matched Field Processing for Underwater Acoustics(World
Scientiﬁc, Singapore,1993), pp. 1–212.
3T. C. Yang, “A method of range and depth estimation by modal decom-
position,”J. Acoust. Soc. Am.82, 1736–1745 (1987).
4E. C. Shang, “Source depth estimation in waveguides,”J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 77, 1413–1418 (1985).
5C. W. Bogart and T. C. Yang, “Matched ﬁeld localization with horizontal
arrays in shallow water; spatial sampling and effective aperture,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.96, 1677–1686 (1994).
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.138 (3), September 2015 T. C. Y ang 1685

--- page 10 ---
6G. V. Frisk and J. F. Lynch, “Shallow water waveguide characteriza-
tion using the Hankel transform,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 76, 205–216
(1984).
7T. C. Yang, “Data-based matched-mode source localization for a moving
source,”J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 135, 1218–1230 (2014). Equation (1) is
referred to in this paper as the generalized Hankel transform.
8Information and data for the SWellEx96 experiment available athttp://
www.mpl.ucsd.edu/swellex96/index.htm (Last viewed August 2014).
9S. C. Walker, P. Roux, and W. A. Kuperman, “Modal Doppler theory of
an arbitrarily accelerating continuous-wave source applied to mode extrac-
tion in the oceanic waveguide,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 122, 1426–1439
(2007).
10W. C. Lindsey and C. M. Chie, “A survey of digital phase-locked loops,”
IEEE Trans. Commun.COM-69, 410–431 (1981).
11M. Stojanovic, J. Catipovic, and J. G. Proakis, “Adaptive multichannel
combining and equalization for underwater acoustic communications,”
J. Acoust. Soc. Am.94, 1621–1631 (1993).
12K. M. Becker and G. V. Frisk, “Evaluation of an autoregressive spectral
estimator for modal wave number estimation in range-dependent shallow
water waveguides,”J. Acoust. Soc. Am.120, 1423–1434 (2006) and refer-
ences therein.
13T. C. Yang, “Modal shading coefﬁcients for high resolution source depth
localization,”J. Acoust. Soc. Am.87, 668–672 (1990).
14The effect of the source motion induces not only a shift of the source fre-
quency but also a shift of the mode wavenumber byDkm ¼ km(v/Um), where
Um is the mode group velocity, as discussed by K. E. Hawker [J. Acoust.
Soc. Am.65, 675–681 (1979)]. The shifts in the mode wavenumbers are not
resolved by the proposed modal beamforming and will be ignored.
1686 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 138 (3), September 2015 T. C. Y ang

