--- page 1 ---
Data-based matched-mode source localization for a moving
source
T. C. Y anga)
Institute of Applied Marine Physics and Undersea Technology, National Sun Yat-sen University,
Kaohsiung 80424, Taiwan
(Received 2 September 2013; revised 7 January 2014; accepted 10 January 2014)
A data-based matched-mode source localization method is proposed in this paper for a moving
source, using mode wavenumbers and depth functions estimated directly from the data, without
requiring any environmental acoustic information and assuming any propagation model. The
method is in theory free of the environmental mismatch problem because the mode replicas are
estimated from the same data used to localize the source. Besides the estimation error due to
the approximations made in deriving the data-based algorithms, the method has some inherent
drawbacks: (1) It uses a smaller number of modes than theoretically possible because some modes
are not resolved in the measurements, and (2) the depth search is limited to the depth covered by the
receivers. Using simulated data, it is found that the performance degradation due to the afore-mentioned
approximation/limitation is marginal compared with the original m atched-mode source localization
method. The proposed method has a potential to es timate the source range and depth for real data
and be free of the environmental m ismatch problem, noting that certain aspects of the (estimation)
algorithms have previously been tested against data. The key issues are discussed in this paper.
VC 2014 Acoustical Society of America.[ http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4863270]
PACS number(s): 43.60.Kx, 43.60.Jn, 43.30.Wi [ZHM] Pages: 1218–1230
I. INTRODUCTION
Matched ﬁeld processing (MFP) was introduced some-
times ago as a method to localize the source in range and
depth using acoustic data received on a vertical line array
(VLA).1 The received data are steered by the calculated ﬁeld
(for an assumed source position) using a propagation model,
referred to as the replica ﬁeld, given known sound speed and
bottom proﬁles. Source location is determined by the peak of
the range-depth ambiguity function where the calculated
(replica) ﬁeld best matches the data ﬁeld.2,3 When the sound
propagation is accurately modeled, as in a slowly varying
environment, matched ﬁeld processing yields good source
localization results.4 In a temporally varying, and range de-
pendent environment, the results are not as good (i.e., in
error) because the sound speed and bottom proﬁles are not
exactly known as a function of range and time. Often there
appear many high level sidelobes making the identiﬁcation
of source location ambiguous. This is known as the environ-
mental mismatch problem—due to sparse and not real time
environmental measurements. One solution is to estimate the
environmental parameters and source parameters simultane-
ously based on the received data.5 The number of parameters
that can be searched for is restricted by the independent
degrees of freedom in the input data, limiting the search usu-
ally to a range independent environment. Others have pro-
posed modiﬁed (signal processing) methods designed
to tolerate environmental mismatches. They include: (1)
Using multiple neighboring location constraints6 or sound-
speed perturbation constraints 7 to improve the robustness of
the matched ﬁeld solution and (2) assigning a priori proba-
bility distributions of the unknown source location and prop-
agation parameters and then approximating the maximum
a posteriori probability distribution of the source location,
given the received data. 8 These methods generally involve
intensive computations and address, to a large extent, the
performance related to the main lobe (level and position uncer-
tainty). In practice, the problemof incorrect source localization
often comes from anomalous peaks (at locations far away
from the true source range and depth) due to environmental
mismatch, noise, and/or interference, etc., resulting in ﬂuctuat-
ing and inconsistent answers over the measurement time. In
other words, the robustness of the estimations is not assured.
This aspect of the problem (the mismatch) may require an in-
formation theoretical approach.9
Source localization using normal mode theory has
drawn much attention in shallow water applications due to
the modal nature of sound propagation, particularly at low
frequencies. Shang et al. pointed out that the source range
can be estimated using the phase difference between the
modes.10 Similarly, source depth can be estimated from the
ratio of excitation of different modes or from the closure
relation of normal modes given that source range has been
estimated.11 Yang applied modal beamforming to the mode
amplitudes, which were estimated by applying modal
decomposition to the VLA data, 12 where to avoid mode
estimation bias, he used eigenvector decomposition for the
covariance matrix of the mode depth functions. This
method can also be considered as matched mode processing
(MMP) because the mode steering vector is the calculated
mode amplitudes of the replica ﬁeld. The main difference
(between this and earlier work) is that MMP produces an
array gain13 (similar to MFP) to enhance the signal-to-noise
a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Electronic mail:
tsihyang@gmail.com
1218 J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 135 (3), March 2014 0001-4966/2014/135(3)/1218/13/$30.00 VC 2014 Acoustical Society of America
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 2 ---
ratio (SNR), providing better estimates in low SNR cases.
Source localization was demonstrated with Arctic data tak-
ing advantage of its stable sound speed proﬁle. It was the
ﬁrst published demonstration of matched mode/ﬁeld process-
ing. One advantage of MMP is the mode ﬁlter, i.e., the
ability to drop (ﬁlter) the modes that are sensitive to environ-
mental mismatches at the expense of some (slight) degrada-
tion in the array gain. (For example, in the Arctic case, one
drops the high order modes that interact with the ice cover.)
To assure the quality of mode decomposition and increase
the array gain, a relatively large aperture VLA is usually
used.
For a review of the variety of MFP work before 1993,
one is referred to Refs. 2 and 3 for comprehensive
discussions.
The vulnerability of MFP/MMP to environmental
mismatches has suggested alternative approaches to source
location that are model independent. A well-known model-
independent approach is time reversal, which focuses the
signal to the source position based on the probe signal emit-
ted by the source.14 For passive detection, one uses a guide
source (or a source of opportunity) as the probe source. 15–17
In this case, one passive-conjugates the receiver data with
the signal from the guide source to create “data” at a virtual
receiver. The environmental dependence is reduced (largely
removed) if the guide source is located at short distances to
the target. In practice, the guide source is not always avail-
able and is often located at a different depth than the target.
In this paper, we present a model-independent approach
to source localization and tracking, assuming a moving
source. It is conducted in the mode domain using mode
wavenumbers and depth functions directly estimated from
the data without requiring any environmental information
and assuming any propagation model. In the phone space, it
is a model-independent MFP method. As the name implies,
the main advantage of this method is that it is potentially
free of the environmental mismatch problem and is applica-
ble to (slowly) time-varying environments if the mode pa-
rameters (wavenumbers and depth functions) are estimated
from the data emitted from the target of interest—the target
to be localized and tracked. One can also use data of oppor-
tunity to estimate the modal parameters if the data come
from a source in the proximity of the target (in range, depth,
or time). The latter case will not be studied here.
The method can also be applied to a reduced-aperture or
sparsely populated VLA as is the case for MFP with a
degraded performance (lower signal or array gain) with the
following limitations: Only the source the depth of which is
within the depth span of the receiving VLA can be localized,
and the depth resolution is limited by the phone spacing, or
the Cramer-Rao bound,18 whichever is larger. In contrast,
the conventional MFP does not have the additional
constraints.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II, one brieﬂy
reviews the Hankel transform that was used to estimate the
mode wavenumbers by integrating the narrowband signal
(from a moving source) over range in a range independent or
adiabatic environment. 19,20 The method is generalized in
Sec. III to a VLA, without knowing the source range, to
estimate the mode wavenumber and, in addition, the depth
functions. The estimated mode wavenumbers and depth
functions are then used to estimate the source location by
matched mode/ﬁeld processing. One notes that the data-
based generalized “Hankel” transform is an approximation
of the original Hankel transform; as a result, the estimated
wavenumbers and depth functions may not be accurate com-
pared with the true values. The question is how the approxi-
mation affects the source localization performance
compared with the original matched mode/ﬁeld processing
with no environmental mismatch. This issue is investigated
using numerical simulations in a summer sound speed proﬁle
(SSP) assuming long VLAs with different phone spacing. As
is well known, source localization with a narrowband signal
often suffers from the sidelobe problem, and the usual prac-
tice (to overcome this problem) is to use a broadband signal.
With this in mind, we propose a data-based broadband
source localization method in Sec.IV. For coherent broad-
band signals (with a well-deﬁned waveform), one can repeat
the preceding processing for each frequency components, and
sum the range and depth ambiguity functions. For practical
applications, the more challenging and interesting problem is
to localize a target using the broadband noise radiated by the
target, which is random and incoherent in nature, and for
which the Hankel transform does not work. Assuming that the
target also radiates narrowband signals, from which one esti-
mates the mode wavenumbers and depth functions at the
given frequencies, we propose a data-based method for source
localization using the incoherent broadband frequencies. To
estimate the mode wavenumbers for the broadband frequency
components, we use an interpolation formula based on the
equation for the mode group velocity. To interpolate the mode
depth functions between frequencies, we employ the WKB
approximation for the mode depth functions. The approxima-
tions are discussed, and the performance degradations are
evaluated for the broadband case using simulation data. In
Sec. VI, one studies the localization performance for a short
VLA and its limitations. A short summary for the data-based
approach is given in Sec.VI. This approach has a potential to
be applied to real data. Signal processing issues for real data
are discussed in this section.
II. MODE WAVENUMBER ESTIMATION USING
HANKEL TRANSFORM
The Hankel transform provides a general theoretical
framework for studying acoustic propagation due to a narrow-
band point source in a horizontally stratiﬁed medium. The
solution of the Helmholtz equation can be expressed as the
zero-order Hankel transform of the depth-dependent Green’s
function,gðkrÞ,g i v e nb y pðrÞ¼
Ð1
0 gðkrÞJ0ðkrrÞkrdkr and
vice versa, gðkrÞ¼ Ð1
0 pðrÞJ0ðkrrÞrdr,w h e r eJ0 is the Bessel
function of order zero. 19,20 At large ranges, krr /C29 1, the
Hankel transform can be approximated by a Fourier trans-
form, given as follows:19,20
pðrÞ/C24 e/C0 ip=4
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
2pr
p
ð1
0
gðkrÞe/C0 kr r ﬃﬃﬃﬃ
kr
p
dkr; krr /C29 1; r > 0;
(1)
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization 1219
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 3 ---
gðkrÞ/C24 eip=4
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ2pkr
p
ð1
0
pðrÞeikrr ﬃﬃrp dr; krr /C29 1; kr > 0:
(2)
Using the normal mode representation for the pressure ﬁeld,
pðr; zÞ¼
XM
m¼1
AmðrÞ/mðzÞ;
AmðrÞ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
kmr
r
/mðzsÞe/C0 ikmr/C0 amr/C0 ip=4; (3)
where km and am are the mode wavenumber and attenuation
coefﬁcient, /m is the mode depth function, Am denotes the
mode amplitude of the mth mode, and zs and z denote the
source and receiver depth, respectively, one obtains for a ﬁ-
nite range R,
gðkrÞ/C24
XM
m¼1
/mðzsÞ/mðzÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃkrkm
p
ðR
0
eiðkr/C0 km/C0 iamÞrdr
’
XM
m¼1
am
/mðzsÞ/mðzÞ
kr /C0 km /C0 iam
; (4)
where
am ¼ eiðkr/C0 kmÞR/C0 amR /C0 1
ikm
: (5)
It was observed that the modal wavenumber spectrum, given
by Eq. (4), contains many peaks, which occur when the
wavenumber equals the mode wavenumbers, noting that the
mode attenuation is generally orders of magnitude smaller
than the mode wavenumbers. Thus one can measure/estimate
the mode wavenumbers from the peaks of the wavenumber
spectrum by taking Fourier (wavenumber) transform of the
pressure ﬁeld with respect to range. 19,20 The method has
been generalized to weakly range dependent environments
where adiabatic normal modes are valid and tested against
experimental data in various ocean environments.19–21
III. DATA-BASED MODAL BEAMFORMING
To illustrate the data-based source localization method,
we shall consider a range independent environment and
assume that the source moves at a constant speed during the
observation time. The source range is unknown, and its
depth can be slowly changing with time; for the present dis-
cussion, we shall assume it is at a ﬁxed depth. The source ge-
ometry relative to the VLA is shown in Fig. 1. We assume
that the source radiates narrowband tones (for narrowband
source localization) and broadband noise-like signals
(for broad band source localization). By Fourier analysis
(using long time integration), one obtains a high resolution
estimate of the Doppler shifts of the narrowband signals,
from which one determines: (1) The radial speed of the tar-
get, v ¼ CðDf =f Þ, where C is the average sound speed, Df is
the Doppler shift, and f is the known source frequency; and
(2) the radial range traveled (the distance traveled projected
along the radial direction) over a time period T, DR ¼ vT.
The data received by the VLA over time T are used to esti-
mate the mode wavenumber and depth functions, which are
assumed time-invariant during this period. To estimate the
source range and depth, the data are divided into K blocks.
For each block of data, one applies the data-based source
localization algorithm to estimate the range and depth using
the narrowband and/or broadband signal components. The
results can be used to track the source range and depth as a
function of time. The key issues are the accuracies of the
estimated range and depth, and the (degree of) ambiguities
of the estimation; for the latter one investigates the sidelobe-
to-main lobe ratio of the ambiguity function.
A. Estimation of the mode wavenumbers and mode
depth functions
Because the source range is unknown, one cannot use the
wavenumber transform, Eq. (2), to estimate the mode wave-
numbers. The modiﬁed equation to use is given as follows,
/C22gðkr; zjÞ¼ eip=4
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ2pkr
p
ðr2
r1
pðr; zjÞeikr rSðrÞdr; krr1 /C29 1; (6)
where /C22g denotes the estimated Green’s function, pðr; zjÞ is a
narrowband signal received on the jth receiver, r ¼ r1 þ vt,
where t ¼ ti, for the ith block of data, r1 is the unknown ini-
tial source range, and r2 ¼ r1 þ DR. The function S(r)i s
intended to compensate for the spreading loss and will be
determined from data using
SðrÞ¼
XN
j¼1
jpðr; zjÞj2 Dz
2
4
3
5
/C0 1=2
; (7)
where Dz is the phone spacing. Given a large aperture VLA,
one ﬁnds based on Eq. (3) and the mode orthogonality
relation
XN
j¼1
/mðzjÞ/lðzjÞDz ¼ dml; (8)
FIG. 1. (Color online) The source track (solid line) relative to the VLA with
an inset of the sound speed proﬁle.
1220 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 4 ---
that
SðrÞ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃr
2p
r XM
m¼1
/2
mðzsÞ e/C0 2amr
km
"# /C0 1=2
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃr
2p
r
~SðrÞ; (9)
where, one notes that ~SðrÞ¼ ea1r1 ½PM
m¼1 /2
mðzsÞ e/C0 2ðam/C0 a1Þr1ð
/C2 e/C0 2amðr/C0 r1Þ=kmÞ/C138/C0 1=2 varies slowly with respect to r and can
be approximated by a constant because 0 /C20ð am /C0 a1Þr1 /C28 1
and 0 /C20 amðr /C0 r1Þ/C20 amDR /C28 1 over the range span DR,
hence e/C0 2ðam/C0 a1Þr1 e/C0 2amðr/C0 r1Þ ’ 1. Normalizing ~Sðr1Þ to unity,
one ﬁnds
/C22gðkr; zjÞ/C24
XM
m¼1
/mðzsÞ/mðzjÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃkrkm
p
ðr2
r1
eiðkr /C0 km/C0 iamÞrdr
¼
XM
m¼1
am
/mðzsÞ/mðzjÞ
kr /C0 km /C0 iam
; (10)
where
am ¼ eiðkr/C0 kmÞr2/C0 amr2 /C0 eiðkr /C0 kmÞr1/C0 amr1
ikm
: (11)
One ﬁnds that for a large aperture VLA, approximating ~SðrÞ
by a constant, Eq. (10) yields the same result as Eq. (4).I n
practice, for a ﬁnite aperture VLA, ~SðrÞ is likely to oscil-
late with respect to r due to the residual mode interference.
[For example, ~SðrÞ’ s0 þ s1 sin klmr with s1 /C28 s0,w h e r e
klm ¼ 2p=klm is the mode cycle distance between the l and
mth modes.] In this case, it helps to smooth the oscillation
by range averaging. For a non-constant ~SðrÞ, the wave-
number spectrum is given by convolving Eq. (10) with
~SðkrÞ¼ Ðr2
r1
e/C0 ikr r ~SðrÞdr, which has an effect of broadening
the widths of the peaks without changing the peak
position.
Note that the widths of the spectral peaks of individual
modes are inversely proportional to the range span,DR. When
the range span is equal or less than the mode cycle distance,
the modes involved may not be resolved by the wavenumber
analysis. In that case, one obtains an estimate of the average
wavenumber of the unresolved modes. In general, this is not
the case given data over a sufﬁcient range span. The estimated
mode wavenumbers (from the spectral analysis) will be
denoted by /C22km to differentiate them from the true wavenum-
bers. For the theoretical analysis to follow, we shall approxi-
mate~SðrÞ by a constant with ~Sðr1Þ normalized to unity. In
this case, /C22gðkm; zjÞ¼ gðkm; zjÞ as mentioned in the preceding
text. The spectrum value atkr ¼ /C22km is then given by
gð/C22km; zjÞ/C24 bm/mðzjÞ; (12)
where using Eq. (11), one ﬁnds22
bm ¼ 2e/C0 amr0
amkm
sinh amDR
2
/C18/C19
/mðzsÞ; (13)
where r0 ¼ð r2 þ r1Þ=2 and DR ¼ r2 /C0 r1. Note that bm is a
real number in Eq. (13). The important thing is that it does
not carry mode and range dependent phases, which would
otherwise inﬂuence/bias the range estimation. From
Eq.(12), one obtains an estimate of the mode depth function
/C22/mðzjÞ at the receiver depth zj using the amplitude measured
at the spectral peaks,
/C22/mðzjÞ¼ gð/C22km; zjÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
XN
j¼1
jgð/C22km; zjÞj2Dz
vuut
¼ bm/ðzjÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
jbmj2XN
j¼1
/2
mðzjÞDz
vuut
’ /ðzjÞ; (14)
where the mode depth functions are normalized byPN
j¼1 j/mðzjÞj2Dz ¼ 1 using Eq. (8) for a large aperture
VLA. In practice, the estimated mode depth function /C22/mðzjÞ
will deviate from the true mode depth function.
To summarize, a method is proposed in this section to
estimate the mode wavenumbers [using Eq. (6)] and depth
functions [using Eq. (14)] for data received on a VLA
from a moving source. Equation (6) c a nb ev i e w e da sa
data-based generalized Hankel transform (at large ranges)
that does not require knowledge about the source range; a
large aperture VLA is required in principle. Because of
the approximation involved (not knowing the source
range), the estimated mode wavenumbers and mode depth
functions may not be accurate. Also some of the modes
may not be resolved by the wavenumber analysis. The
effects of the approximation on the performance of source
localization will be evaluated in Sec.III C using numerical
examples, after a discussion of the data-based source
localization algorithm, given in the next section,
Sec.III B.
B. Data-based source localization: Narrowband signal
Given the estimated mode wavenumbers and depth
functions, one can estimate the source range and depth as a
function of time (by estimating the source range and depth
for each snapshot or block of the data). To estimate the
source location for a given (ith) block of data, one constructs
a range and depth ambiguity function,
DMMPðr;zÞ¼
/C12/C12/C12/C12
X/C22M
m¼1
/C22/mðzÞ ei/C22kmr
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ/C22km
p
XN
j¼1
/C22/mðzjÞpðrs; zjÞDz
/C12/C12/C12/C12
2
;
(15)
where z ¼ zj, j ¼ 1t o N; /C22M denotes the total number of
modes (or /C22km) measured/resolved by the wavenumber analy-
sis, and pðrs; zjÞ is the pressure ﬁeld and rs is the unknown
source range at time ti. Equation (15) can be applied to a
VLA of arbitrary conﬁguration with the understanding that
the performance will be aperture dependent. For the theoreti-
cal analyses given in the following text, we shall assume a
large aperture VLA so that we can compare the data-based
method with the original MMP/MFP. Using the mode ortho-
gonality condition Eq. (8) for a large aperture VLA, Eq. (15)
can be simpliﬁed to
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization 1221
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 5 ---
DMMPðr; zÞ¼ 2p
rs
/C12/C12/C12/C12
X/C22M
l;m¼1
/C22/mðzÞ/lðzsÞ
XN
j¼1
/C22/mðzjÞ/lðzjÞ
/C2 Dz ei½/C22kmr/C0 klrs/C138/C0alrs
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ/C22kmk1
p
/C12/C12/C12/C12
2
¼ 2p
rs
/C12/C12/C12/C12
X/C22M
m¼1
/mðzÞ/mðzsÞ eikmðr/C0 rsÞ/C0 amrs
km
/C12/C12/C12/C12
2
;
(16)
where we assumed /C22km ¼ km, /C22/mðzjÞ¼ /mðzjÞ, given a sufﬁ-
cient range span so that the mode wavenumbers are well
resolved. Equation (15) can be interpreted as a data-based
MMP, namely, DMMP ðr; zÞ¼ r=2pðÞ j P /C22M
m¼1 Arplc
m ðr; zÞ
/C0/C1 /C3
/C2 Adata
m j2, where Adata
m /C17PN
j¼1
/C22/mðzjÞpðrs; zjÞDz is the mth
mode amplitude estimated from the data, and Arplc
m ðr; zÞ
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p=r /C22km
/C0/C1q
/C22/mðzÞei/C22kmr is the mth mode amplitude of the
replica ﬁeld for a hypothetical source located at ðr; zÞ; z ¼ zj,
j ¼ 1t o N. [In comparing with MMP, we assumed that given
a large aperture VLA, the mode amplitudes can be obtained
by multiplying the pressure ﬁeld by the mode depth func-
tions with little or no mode leakage problem. Note that no
mode decomposition is used nor required for the data-based
MMP as given in Eq. (15).] Now if all the modes are
included, i.e., /C22M ¼ M by the wavenumber analysis, one ﬁnds
that Eq. (16) becomes the original MMP ambiguity function.
In practice, /C22M < M as illustrated in Sec. III C. Consequently,
the data-based MMP is likely to deviate from the MMP in
the range-depth resolution and the sidelobe structure.
Equation (15) can also be written as
DMFPðr; zÞ¼ r
2p
/C12/C12/C12/C12
XN
j¼1
p/C3
rplcðr; zjÞpðrs; zjÞDz
/C12/C12/C12/C12
2
; (17)
where prplcðr;zjÞ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p=r
p P /C22M
m¼1
/C22/mðzÞ/C22/mðzjÞðe/C0 i/C22kmr=
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ/C22km
p
Þ
denotes the replica ﬁeld (of a reduced number of modes)
with zj denoting the receiver depth. Equation (17) is often
referred to as the Bartlett processor. Note that Eq. (17) can
be applied to a short or limited aperture VLA (covering parts
of the water column) as is the case for the original MFP. The
difference is that for the conventional MFP, one can search
for any source range and depth becauseprplcðr;zjÞ is based
on a model, but for the data-based MFP, prplcðr; zjÞ can be
calculated at any range but only at discrete depths; /C22/mðzÞ is
only known only for z¼zj, j¼1;2;… ;N. In other words, the
depth search is limited to the depths of the physical
receivers. For application to a short VLA, one assumes that
the array has enough receivers to couple to the modes
excited by the source, else it may lack the ability to localize
the source.
It is noted that the data-based source localization algo-
rithm, Eq. (15), follows the same spirit as the matched
ﬁeld/mode processing except that no environmental acous-
tic information (such as SSP and/or bottom proﬁle) is
required, and no propagation model is used to calculate the
replica ﬁeld as a function of range and depth. It is
computationally simple and may be carried out by in-buoy
processing. The drawback is that not all the modes will be
resolved by the Hankel wavenumber analysis. The total
number of modes estimated from the wavenumber spectral
analysis is usually smaller than that allowed by the theory
ð/C22M < MÞ as will be shown by the numerical examples in
the next section (Sec. III C).
C. Numerical examples
Numerical examples are given in this section to examine
the properties of the data-based ambiguity surfaces, Eq. (15),
for a narrowband signal to compare with that using MMP,
Eq. (16). The SSP used for the simulation is similar to that
collected on the New Jersey shelf in the summer time. See
Fig. 1. It consists of a thermocline layer of 10 m with a sound
speed of 1533 m/s. The sound speed decreases almost line-
arly with depth to 1478 m/s at depth of 40 m and remains at
that value until a depth of 88 m. The bottom has a sound
speed /C24 1650 m/s, density 1.76 g/cm3, and attenuation 0.8 dB
per wavelength as used before. Two VLAs will be used in
the simulation, one contains 20 elements spaced at 4 m, and
the other contains 40 elements spaced at 2 m, both covering
the water column from 2 to 80 m. Assume a source moves
away from the VLA with a speed of 5 kn, transmitting a nar-
rowband signal at 350 Hz. The narrowband pressure ﬁeld is
estimated every second, corresponding to a range increment
of 2.5 m between samples of data. For the simulation, the
pressure ﬁeld is generated using the KRAKEN normal mode
program.23 (The source starts out at a range of 5010 m, but
this information is assumed unknown.24) The pressure ﬁelds,
covering a range span of 490 m, are used to estimate the
wavenumber spectrum for each receiver using Eqs.(6) and
(7). The wavenumber spectra summed over all receivers are
shown in Fig. 2(a), where the identiﬁed spectral peaks are
marked by “x.” Twelve mode wavenumbers are estimated
from the spectral peaks. Also shown in Fig. 2(a) is the true
wavenumbers (from the normal mode program) of the lowest
16 modes, marked by symbols “þ.” Compared with the true
wavenumbers, one ﬁnds that the third, seventh, and 12th
order modes are “absent” in Fig. 2(a), and the ﬁfth order
mode has a weak spectral value and is not identiﬁed by the
peak picking program used. For the data-based MMP, which
order normal mode is associated with which resolved mode
is not known nor is it relevant. The number of modes meas-
ured/resolved by data is the important parameter—the larger
the number of the resolved modes, the lower the sidelobe
levels relative to the main lobe.
From the wavenumber spectra, the complex amplitudes
associated with the spectral peaks at a given wavenumber
are used to estimate the mode depth functions as a function
of the receiver depth for the mode identiﬁed by the wave-
number. To determine how good is the estimation, one cal-
culates the correlation coefﬁcient between the estimated and
true mode depth functions, deﬁned by the maximum value of
the cross correlation between the estimated and true mode
depth functions, normalized by the square root of the product
of the maxima autocorrelation of the estimated mode depth
function and that of the true mode depth function. One ﬁnds
1222 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 6 ---
that the correlation coefﬁcient is equal or greater than /C24 0.99
for the 12 resolved modes, indicating a high level of match-
ing between the estimated and true mode depth functions.
The estimated mode depth functions (not shown here) agree
well with the true mode depth functions when properly
normalized.
The 12 estimated mode wavenumbers and depth func-
tions are used to create the range and depth ambiguity surfa-
ces using Eq. (15) for each block of data to compare with
that using MMP, Eq. (16). A range and depth ambiguity sur-
face is shown in Fig. 3, for example, for a block of data
where the source is located at a range of 7000 m and depth
of 50 m. Figures3(a) and 3(b) show the MMP (or MFP) and
data-based MMP ambiguity surfaces for the 40 element
VLA, spaced at 2 m with a 10 dB color scale. Figures 3(c)
and 3(d) show the MMP (or MFP) and data-based MMP am-
biguity surfaces for the 20 element VLA, spaced at 4 m with
the same color scale. (For a VLA covering the water column,
MFP and MMP are basically the same.) Comparing Fig.3(a)
with Fig. 3(c) [or Fig. 3(b) with Fig. 3(d)], one ﬁnds that
both give the correct source range estimation, but the depth
resolution is doubled from 2 to 4 m (due to doubling of
phone spacing), and the peak value is decreased by /C24 6 dB,
due to the decreased signal gain (halved number of phones).
Comparing the data-based MMP ambiguity surfaces
[Figs. 3(b) and 3(d)] with the conventional MMP/MFP surfa-
ces [Figs. 3(a) and 3(c)], one ﬁnds a slight increase in the
sidelobe-to-main lobe ratio (i.e., increased sidelobe level rel-
ative to the main lobe level or smaller difference between
the two). The reason is due to the fact that only 12 modes are
used in the data-based MMP compared with 20 modes used
in the conventional MMP. One notes that the range-depth
ambiguity surfaces in Fig. 3 have many high level sidelobes
due to the narrowband nature of the data; this is not unex-
pected. In general, higher sidelobe-to-main lobe ratios imply
higher probability of incorrect source localization in the
presence of noise and/or environmental mismatch. To
improve the source localization performance and source
FIG. 2. (Color online) Wavenumber spectrum at 350 Hz (a) and 400 Hz (b).
Spectral peaks identiﬁed by the peak picking algorithm are marked by “x”
and the mode wavenumbers calculated by the KRAKEN mode program are
shown by “þ.” The dashed lines pointing upward indicate the modes found
at 350 Hz but not at 400 Hz, and the dashed lines pointing upward show the
modes found at 400 Hz but not at 350 Hz.
FIG. 3. (Color online) Range and
depth ambiguity surface for the 40 ele-
ment VLA spaced at 2 m using
(a) MMP and (b) data-based MMP and
for the 20 element VLA spaced at 4 m
using (c) MMP and (d) data-based
MMP. The input data are a 350 Hz
tonal signal from a source at 7000 m
range and 50 m depth.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization 1223
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 7 ---
range and depth tracking (as a function of time), conven-
tional wisdom suggests the use of broadband signals, which
are known to effectively suppress the sidelobe levels. A
data-based broadband source localization approach will be
presented next.
IV. BROAD BAND SOURCE LOCALIZATION
For broadband source localization, a common practice
is to average the ambiguity surfaces over different frequen-
cies within the band because sidelobe positions vary with
frequencies. For multi-tonal signals emitted by a moving
source, or a coherent broadband signal (with a well-deﬁned
waveform) transmitted by a moving (controlled) source, one
can apply the method of Sec.III to each frequency compo-
nent and add up the ambiguity surfaces. In real life, many
broadband signals are (temporally) incoherent like the
broadband noise radiated by a ship, for which the preceding
Hankel transform method cannot be applied because the
noise-like signal contains random (time-dependent) phases
for each frequency component. Nonetheless, each snapshot
of the noise-like data can still be used to provide an estimate
of the source location because even though the noise-like
signal waveform is random and unknown, the signals
received on the VLA are spatially correlated between the
receivers. The ambiguity functions so obtained can then be
averaged over many snapshots to minimize the variance of
the estimation. For data-based approaches to broadband
source localization, one needs to know the mode wavenum-
bers and depth functions for the broadband frequency com-
ponents. Because they could not be directly estimated from
the broadband noise data, we propose to estimate them by
interpolation from the mode wavenumbers and depth func-
tions of the tonal frequencies, assuming that the source also
radiates narrowband tones. The interpolation of the mode
wavenumbers is derived based on the mode equation for the
mode group velocity, 25 and the interpolation of the mode
depth functions is based on the WKB approximation.25,26
A. Wavenumber estimation across frequencies
To estimate the mode wavenumbers over broad band
frequencies, we use the following equation for the mode
group velocity,25
1
Um
/C17ð2pÞ/C0 1 @km
@f ¼ 4p2 f
km
ðH
0
/2
mðzÞ
qðzÞC2ðzÞ dz; (18)
from which one obtains
k2
mðf Þ/C0 k2
mðf0Þ¼ cmðf 2 /C0 f 2
0 Þ; (19)
where cm ¼ð 2pÞ3ÐH
0 ½/mðzÞ2=qðzÞC2ðzÞ/C138dz is a mode-
dependent function for a given SSP and can be determined
from the data given wavenumber measurements for two tonal
frequencies, cm ¼½ k2
mðf1Þ/C0 k2
mðf0Þ/C138 ðf 2
1 /C0 f 2
0 Þ/C0 1.O n et h e n
obtains a data-based interpolation/extrapolation formula,
k2
mðf Þ/C0 k2
mðf0Þ¼½ k2
mðf1Þ/C0 k2
mðf0Þ/C138f 2 /C0 f 2
0
f 2
1 /C0 f 2
0
; (20)
where we dropped the overhead bar for the estimated mode
wavenumbers.
To check the accuracy of Eq. (20), we create simulated
data at 400 Hz generated by a moving source using the same
environment and geometry as discussed in Sec.III C.W et h e n
estimate the mode wavenumbers at 400 Hz following the same
approach for 350 Hz (the data-based Hankel transform) as
described in Sec.III C. The wavenumber spectrum is shown in
Fig. 2(b) to compare with that at 350 Hz shown in Fig.2(a).B y
changing the wavenumber scale using Eq.(20), one can associ-
ate the (mode) orders between the two sets of wavenumbers
between Figs.2(a) and 2(b) as shown in Fig. 2.O n eﬁ n d sa t
400 Hz that 13 modes, marked by “x,” are resolved by wave-
number analysis out of 16 true modes marked by “ þ.” (For
completeness, we shall state the mode order for each resolved
mode based on that determined from the normal mode pro-
gram. At 400 Hz, we ﬁnd that the third, ninth, and 14th order
modes were weakly excited by thes o u r c e . )F o rt h ed a t a - b a s e d
analysis, the true mode orders are not known nor are they im-
portant. The task is to associate the resolved modes at 350 Hz
with those at 400 Hz. For that purpose, we shall name the mode
number for the resolved modes sequentially in terms of
decreasing wavenumbers. Comparing Fig.2(a) with Fig. 2(b),
one ﬁnds that for the number 6 and 10 modes at 350 Hz, there
are no counter parts at 400 Hz. See the dashed line with arrows
pointing upward in Fig. 2. (They are physically the ninth and
14th order modes). Similarly, for the number 4, 6, and 10
modes at 400 Hz, there are no counter parts at 350 Hz. See the
dashed line with arrows pointing downward in Fig. 2.( T h e y
are physically the ﬁfth, seventh, and 12th modes). For the
remaining modes, one can assoc iate the following numbered
modes [1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,11,12] at 350 Hz with the following
numbered modes [1,2,3,5,7,8,9,11,12,13] at 400 Hz. In other
words, only ten pairs of the modes are common to both 350
and 400 Hz frequencies and can be used for interpolation for
frequencies in between 350 and 400 Hz (of the physically 16
pairs of modes). The price pai d for data-based method is a
reduced number of modes available for source localization.
The mode wavenumbers for frequencies between 350
and 400 Hz can be estimated from the wavenumbers meas-
ured at 350 and 400 Hz using Eq. (20) (for those modes that
are common to both). The results are shown in Fig. 4,
marked by “þ” for nine frequencies from 355 to 395 Hz to
compare with the mode wavenumbers calculated by the nor-
mal mode program, marked by “x” for each frequency. One
ﬁnds good agreement between numerically estimated wave-
numbers and true wavenumbers.
B. Depth function estimation across frequencies
To estimate the mode depth function over broad fre-
quencies, we assume the WKB approximation. 25,26 The
WKB modes between the ray turning points in a sound chan-
nel are given by
/mðzÞ¼ AmðzÞsin gmðzÞ; (21)
where AmðzÞ is a slowly varying amplitude given by
AmðzÞ¼ k/C0 1=2
v;m ðzÞ¼½ x2=C2ðzÞ/C0 k2
m/C138/C0 1=4. Here kv;mðzÞ is the
1224 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 8 ---
mode vertical wavenumber, and the WKB phase is given by
gmðzÞ¼ ga þ
Ðz
a kv;mðz0Þdz0, where the quantity ga is the
phase at the upper turning point. The WKB modes can be
interpreted as the interference pattern created by two plane
waves. One travels upward at a grazing anglehðzÞ, given by
kv;mðzÞ¼ kðzÞsin hðzÞ, where kðzÞ¼ x=CðzÞ, and the other
travels downward at the same angle. To maintain the same
number of interference nulls (i.e., the mode number) as
frequency is changed, the angle of propagation must
change accordingly. Note that the mode wavenumber kmðzÞ
¼ kðzÞcos hðzÞ generally increases with frequency, and hence
kv;mðzÞ generally decreases with frequency. Equation (21)
suggests that the mode depth functions at different frequen-
cies maintain the same number of nulls or axis-crossing
points where /mðzÞ¼ 0, but the spatial extent (coverage)
decreases with increasing frequencies due to decreasing
kv;mðzÞ, as observed based on numerical calculations of
mode depth functions.25 Generally speaking, the mode depth
functions change slowly within a narrow frequency band
betweenf0 and f1,i f ðf1 /C0 f0Þ/C28ð f1 þ f0Þ. In this case, to
estimate the mode depth functions at frequencies between
f0 and f1, we propose the following procedures: (1)
Determine whether the mode depth functions estimated at
the two frequencies f0 and f1 have the same order (number of
intensity nulls or maxima) by cross-correlating the mode
depth functions. The pairs of modes having the largest nor-
malized cross-correlation coefﬁcients are hypothesized to
have the same order. (2) Determine the mode depth func-
tions for the ordered pairs at frequencies betweenf0 and f1
by linear interpretation.
For the mode depth functions estimated at 350 and
400 Hz, we plot the absolute values of the mode depth func-
tions for the [1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9,11,12] modes at 350 Hz and
compare with the mode depth functions for the
[1,2,3,5,7,8,9,11,12,13] modes at 400 Hz one by one. We
ﬁnd that for each pair of modes (between the 350 and
400 Hz), the amplitudes have the same number of peaks and
valleys as expected for the same order of mode, conﬁrming
that the modes paired based on the wavenumber scaling rule
(Sec. IV B) were correctly associated. Also the cross correla-
tion of the mode depth functions between each pair of asso-
ciated modes shows higher correlation than cross correlation
with other non-associated modes, conﬁrming that the mode
association is correct. It is noted that when the ﬁrst (order)
mode is not found in the wavenumber spectrum (as for a sur-
face source), the mode association by wavenumber scaling
may be ambiguous because in this case, one does not have
the lowest order mode to serve as a reference. In that case,
cross correlation of the estimated mode amplitudes can be
used to associate the modes for those mode depth functions
that are adequately (Nyquist) sampled.
The mode depth functions at frequencies between 350
and 400 Hz are obtained by linearly interpolating the mode
depths functions estimated at 350 and 400 Hz for the ten
pairs of modes. The interpolated mode depth functions are
in good agreement with that obtained from the KRAKEN nor-
mal mode program. There are minor differences but they
do not affect source localization. The results are not shown
here.
For two frequencies f0 and f1 that are widely separated,
one can estimate the WKB mode depth function
AmðzÞsin gmðzÞ by evaluating the vertical mode wavenumber
kv;mðz; f Þ at frequency f. One ﬁnds, using Eq. (19),
k2
v;mðz; f Þ/C0 k2
v;mðz; f0Þ¼
/C20 4p2
C2ðzÞ /C0 cm
/C21
ðf 2 /C0 f 2
0 Þ
¼½ k2
v;mðz; f1Þ/C0 k2
v;mðz; f0Þ/C138f 2 /C0 f 2
0
f 2
1 /C0 f 2
0
;
(22)
where kv;mðz; f0Þ and kv;mðz; f1Þ are estimated from the
mode depth functions at z ¼ zi, i ¼ 1; 2; 3; … ; N.
Interpolation of mode depth functions in this case is more
complicated.
C. Broadband ambiguity surfaces
One obtains the broadband ambiguity surfaces by sum-
ming the ambiguity surfaces over the narrowband frequen-
cies. For the numerical simulations, we choose 11
frequencies between 351 and 399 Hz. Repeating the narrow-
band source localization for 11 frequencies (for the source at
7000 m range and 50 m depth, see Sec. III C and Fig. 3), the
broadband ambiguity surface, summing over the 11 ambigu-
ity surfaces, are shown in Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) for the 40
element VLA, spaced at 2 m, using the conventional
FIG. 4. (Color online) Mode wave-
numbers at nine frequencies from 355
to 395 Hz are estimated from the mode
wavenumbers at 350 and 400 Hz using
Eq. (20) and marked by “ þ” to com-
pare with that calculated by the KRAKEN
program, marked by “x”.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization 1225
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 9 ---
MMP/MFP and data-based MMP methods, respectively. The
color scale shows a 10 dB dynamic range for both of them.
One observes that the source range and depth are clearly
identiﬁed using a broadband signal. Comparing Fig.5(b)
with Fig. 5(a), the sidelobe-to main lobe ratios are a little bit
higher ( /C24 1 dB) for the data-based MMP than the conven-
tional MMP. One of the reasons is that the data-based MMP
uses only ten modes, whereas the conventional MMP uses
20 modes. For this simulation, the ratio of the input signal
level averaged over receivers and frequencies with respect to
the noise level averaged the same way is about 20 dB. The
ambiguity surfaces shown in Fig. 5 are for one snapshot of
broadband data. In this case, there is interference between
the signal and noise; this contributes to higher sidelobe lev-
els. It can be veriﬁed that the ambiguity surface averaged
over many snapshots has a reduced sidelobe level; the SNR
at the main peak compared with the input SNR is the array
gain. The detection problem is outside the scope of this
paper.
Figures 5(c) and 5(d) show the broadband MMP/MFP
and data-based MMP ambiguity surfaces for the 40 element
VLA, spaced at 4 m. One ﬁnds that the 20 element VLA pro-
vides equally good source location in terms of sidelobe
structure, albeit with a poorer depth resolution (from 2 to
4 m) and smaller signal gain. The sidelobe-to-main lobe
ratios are approximately the same comparing Figs. 5(c) to
5(a) and Figs. 5(d) to 5(b).
Figures 6(a) and 6(b) show the broadband MMP/MFP
and data-based MMP ambiguity surfaces for a near surface
source located at 4 m depth using the 40 element VLA,
spaced at 2 m. The same 11 frequencies from 355 to 395
Hz were used. For the data-based MMP, the mode wave-
number and depth functions are estimated for 11 modes
excited by the moving surface source in the same manner
as discussed in Sec. III. (The 4 m source excites predomi-
nantly the seventh to 16th modes with intensities peaked at
the 11th and 12th modes.) Figures6(c) and 6(d) show the
broadband MMP/MFP and data-based MMP ambiguity
surfaces for the 20 element VLA, spaced at 4 m, for the
same 11 frequencies. One notes that the ambiguity surfaces
for the shallow source (Fig. 6) have higher sidelobes
compared with that for the 50 m source (Fig. 5). The reason
is that the high order modes generated by the near surface
source are not so well resolved by the VLA.
V. SHORT VLA
A VLA, which spans only a portion of the water col-
umn, is desirable from the system point of view (reduced
cost, easy deployment, and extended life time when powered
by battery) if it can be used to estimate the source location
reliably for the targets of interest. The conventional
approach by averaging the ambiguity surfaces over frequen-
cies requires that the main lobe locations are consistent
between frequencies. Now at a ﬁxed frequency, the range-
depth ambiguity surface for a short/sparse VLA generally
contains more high level sidelobes than that for a VLA cov-
ering the full water column because the mode functions are
(severely) under sampled. This is likely to lead to source
localization errors in the presence of environmental mis-
match (in real data). If the mismatch problem goes away
using the data-based source localization method, the utility
of a short VLA may become attractive again, for example,
when the VLAs are deployed as part of a distributed system.
As an example, we show in Fig. 7 the broadband range
and depth ambiguity surfaces obtained by averaging over
FIG. 5. (Color online) Broadband
range and depth ambiguity surface,
obtained by summing the narrowband
ambiguity surfaces for 11 frequencies
between 350 and 400 Hz, are shown
for the 40 element VLA spaced at 2 m
using (a) MMP and (b) data-based
MMP and for the 20 element VLA
spaced at 4 m using (c) MMP and (d)
data-based MMP. The source is
located at 7000 m range and 50 m
depth.
1226 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 10 ---
11 frequencies (as discussed in Sec. IV C) for a VLA with
13 elements extending from 30 to 78 m at 4 m spacing.
Figure 7(a) is for the conventional MFP, using 20 modes
for a given frequency, and Fig. 7(b) is obtained by the data-
based MFP [Eq. (17)], using ten modes for each frequency.
One ﬁnds that the broad band MFP ambiguity surface has
higher sidelobe-to-main lobe ratios for the short VLA
[Fig.7(a)] compared with that using that using the full
water column array [Fig. 5(d)]. On the other hand, the am-
biguity surfaces for the short VLA have similar sidelobe-
to-main lobe ratios for the data-based MFP as well as the
conventional MFP.
While the data-based MFP can, strictly speaking,
only be used to search for sources the depth of which is
within the depth span of the VLA, one may extend the
depth search for a short VLA by extrapolating the mode
depth functions using the WKB modes, Eq.(21), deter-
mined using the mode depth functions measured at the
receiver depths. This topic will not be pursued in this
paper.
VI. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSIONS
In this paper, we developed the data-based matched
mode/ﬁeld source localization algorithms for a moving
source, using mode wavenumbers and depth functions esti-
mated directly from the data. The method is in principle free
of the environmental mismatch problem because the mode
replicas are estimated from the same data used to localize
the source, and the approximations made (in deriving the
data-based algorithms) are very general and independent of
the environments. The proposed method does have some in-
herent disadvantages: (1) It uses a smaller number of modes
than theoretically possible because some modes are not
resolved in the measurements and (2) the depth search is
limited to the depth covered by the receivers. The ﬁrst
FIG. 6. (Color online) Broadband
range and depth ambiguity surfaces,
obtained by summing the narrowband
ambiguity surfaces for 11 frequencies
between 350 and 400 Hz, are shown
for the 40 element VLA spaced at 2 m
using (a) MMP and (b) data-based
MMP and for the 20 element VLA
spaced at 4 m using (c) MMP and (d)
data-based MMP. The source is
located at 7000 m range and 4 m depth.
FIG. 7. (Color online) Broadband
range and depth ambiguity surfaces,
obtained by summing the narrowband
ambiguity surfaces for 11 frequencies
between 350 and 400 Hz, are shown
for the 13 element VLA, extending
from 30 to 78 m, using (a) MFP and
(b) data-based MFP. The source is
located at 7000 m range and 50 m
depth.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization 1227
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 11 ---
order issue is whether and how the approximations and the
limitations affect the source localization performance. To
address this issue, we conduct numerical simulations to
study/evaluate the performance difference between the data-
based and the original MMP/MFP. One ﬁnds that for the
cases studied, the sidelobe-to-main lobe ratio increases by
/C24 1 dB comparing the data-based MMP range/depth ambigu-
ity surfaces with that of the original MMP/MFP. The results
suggest that the data-based MMP/MFP is capable of localiz-
ing the source with a performance comparable to that of the
original MMP/MFP. The advantage is that the data-based
MMP/MFP does not require any environmental information
nor does it require a propagation model to calculate the rep-
lica ﬁelds.
Speciﬁcally, for the narrowband signals, we proposed a
data-based generalized Hankel transform to estimate the
mode wavenumbers and mode depth functions. The original
Hankel transform, used previously to estimate the mode
wavenumbers, requires knowledge of the source range. To
compensate for the cylindrical spreading loss of the signal
(without knowing the source range), we used the depth-
averaged signal intensity measured from data. This algo-
rithm requires in principle a large aperture VLA. It can be
applied to short VLAs by range-averaging the depth-
averaged intensities. From the Hankel-transformed wave-
number spectra, one estimates the mode wavenumbers from
the spectral peaks. In addition, the mode depth functions can
be estimated based on the complex amplitudes of the spectral
peaks for each receiver. For the numerical simulation, one
assumes that the source travels 450 m radially within 3 min
observation time (at a speed 5 kn). One ﬁnds that 12 modes
(of 16) can be resolved by the generalized Hankel transform.
The data-based range-depth ambiguity surface shows a
slightly higher sidelobe-to-main lobe ratio due to the smaller
number of modes used and (spectral) estimation errors.
To localize a target using the noise-like signals radiated
by the target, we assume that the target also radiates narrow-
band tonal signals as is often the case. Given the wavenum-
bers estimated at the tonal frequencies, we use an equation
for the mode group velocity to interpolate the mode wave-
numbers for the broadband frequency components. To esti-
mate the mode depth functions for the broadband signals, we
assume the WKB approximation. Numerical examples are
given for a broadband signal by summing incoherently the
range-depth ambiguity surfaces over 11 frequencies between
350 and 400 Hz. Only ten modes are used out of 16 normal
modes because only ten modes are resolved at both the 350
and 400 Hz. This reduced number of modes is responsible
for a /C24 1 dB higher sidelobe-to-main lobe ratio for the data-
based approach compared the original MMP/MFP.
The proposed method has a potential to be applied to
real data and be free of the environmental mismatch prob-
lem, noting that certain aspects of the (generalized) Hankel
transform have already been tested against data. The state of
the art and the processing issues are summarized in the fol-
lowing text.
(1) First, one notes that the original Hankel transform
has been successfully applied to experimental data in
different waters including weakly range-dependent envi-
ronments where adiabatic propagation can be assumed.
In testing the original Hankel transform against data, the
source range was assumed known.19–21 For the algorithm
proposed here, the source range is assumed unknown,
but the range span is assumed to be estimated from data
for a source traveling a straight line with a constant
speed. [For a non-radial run, the range span is given by
DR ¼ ÐT
o vðtÞdt ¼ /C22vT, where the radial velocity v (meas-
ured from the Doppler shift) is changing with time. 27]I t
is likely that the range span DR may only be approxi-
mate due to uncertainty in the Doppler estimation. The
question is how this will affect the source range
estimation.
Assuming that the velocity estimate is off by a factora, so
will the range span be. Based on Eq. (6), one ﬁnds that if
the estimated range span is in error by a factor of a, the
wavenumber is reduced/enlarged by a factor 1/a, which in
turn implies that the search range is scaled up/down by a
factor of a. This implies that the range estimation for the
source will have an error on the order of (1/C0 a) times the
true range. It is noted that the scale change is not expected
to affect the distribution or the “landscape” of the ambigu-
ity surface. In other words, one expects that the source
will be consistently localized over time despite the scale
change (or shift in target position) because there is no
environmental mismatch. The fact that the peaks of the
ambiguity surfaces will form a (target) track as a function
of time (with a small variance) is very important from the
system point of view; it provides an important cue on
whether a target exists or not. (The problem with the con-
ventional MFP is that the source localization results are
often inconsistent over time in the presence of environ-
mental mismatch, making the results questionable.)
(2) For real data, the radiated tonal signals often encounter a
time-varying phase change due to the unsteady source
motion; the tonal signal is no longer a pure sinusoidal.
For example, a source towed behind a ship is affected by
the motion of the towing ship, which moves up and
down following the waves, inducing a jittering motion
(acceleration/deceleration) on the tow body. Before
applying the (generalized) Hankel transform, the ﬂuctu-
ating phase due to source acceleration/deceleration needs
to be removed. Likewise, for a source moving in a non-
radial direction, the radial velocity is no longer a con-
stant. In this case, although the phase introduced by the
source acceleration deceleration is deterministic, it can
induce error if the data is processed (integrated) over an
extended period of time. This problem was recently
addressed by Walker et al.,27 who proposed a high reso-
lution nonlinear frequency tracking technique to measure
the instantaneous frequency response of the signal.
Based on that, one introduces a transform to remove
unwanted phase (distortion). This method was (success-
fully) applied to tonal data from the SWellEx 96 experi-
ment to estimate the Doppler shifts and mode depth
functions of individual modes. 27 From the signal proc-
essing point of view, what is required here is the equiva-
lent of a phase locked loop 28 (used in radio and acoustic
1228 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 12 ---
communications) to remove the random phase ﬂuctua-
tion and track the (slowly varying) range dependent
phase. The phase compensation mechanism is discussed
in the appendix.
(3) For real data, one may not be able to integrate the data
over a large range span due to signal ﬂuctuations. Given a
limited range span, certain modes may not be resolved by
the (generalized) Hankel transform. This is likely to intro-
duce performance degradation (increased sidelobe-to-main
lobe ratio) but is not likely to introduce mismatch because
one is matching the unresolved (composite) mode deduced
from the data against the data. (Consequently, the robust-
ness of the result may be maintained.) For short range-
span data, one can apply high resolution methods as
proposed in the literature.29 In that respect, one notes that
wavenumber estimation is no different from spectral esti-
mation. Various techniques proposed/developed in the lit-
erature for spectral estimation of real world data (such as
maximum entropy, maximum likelihood estimation meth-
ods) can be readily applied for wavenumber estimation.
The preceding discussions indicate that while various
aspects of the wavenumber estimation method have been
investigated before, the use of the generalized Hankel trans-
form still remains to be demonstrated with real data. It is
noted that so long as the mode wavenumbers for the ener-
getic modes can be resolved and estimated from the data, the
corresponding mode depth functions can be estimated
accordingly without much loss of information. Given the
estimation of the mode wavenumbers and depth functions
from data, the proposed method has a potential to estimate
the source range and depth from data and be free of the envi-
ronmental mismatch problem. Numerical simulations con-
ducted in this paper suggest small performance degradation
in source localization between the data-based MMP/MFP
and the original MMP/MFP (without mismatch). The actual
performance degradation is likely to be not only dependent
on the array aperture but also on the acoustic environment. It
also will depend on the accuracy of the signal processing
approaches in estimating the mode wavenumbers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the Taiwan National Science
Council Grant No. 101-2218-E-110-001. The author thanks
S. Walker, W.-B. Yang, and L. Fialkowski for discussions.
APPENDIX: PHASE ESTIMATION AND
COMPENSATION
It is well known that source accelerations (decelera-
tions) lead to Doppler broadening of the signal frequency.
The signal from a moving narrowband source with an angu-
lar frequencyxc can be expressed as
pðr; z; tÞ¼ Re
/C20XM
m¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
kmr
r
/mðzsÞ
/C2 eixst/C0 ikmrðtÞ/C0 amrðtÞ/C0 ip=4/mðzÞ
/C21
; (A1)
where xs is the transmitted frequency, r is the source range,
rðtÞ¼ rk þ vt þ 1=2at2 þ/C1/C1/C1¼rk þ vt þ ~rðtÞ, where rk is
the initial range associated with the kth block of data, /C22vi s
the average radial velocity, and ~rðtÞ contains the source
acceleration a. The spectrum amplitude obtained by a
Fourier transform of the kth block of data evaluated at the
Doppler shifted frequency xc ¼ xs /C0 k0v, where
k0 ¼ xs=C0, is given by
pðrk; zÞ¼
XM
m¼1
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2p
kmrk
r
/mðzsÞe/C0 ikmrk/C0 amrk/C0 ip=4
/C2 /mðzÞe/C0 ikm /C22rðtÞ þ Oðvðk0 /C0 kmÞÞ: (A2)
Compared with Eq. (3), the extra term e/C0 ikm /C22rðtÞ contains the
phase distortion due to the source acceleration or jittering.
To compensate for this phase distortion, one needs to esti-
mate the instantaneous frequency of the signal. To this end,
Walker et al. proposed a time domain least mean square ﬁt
between the received short-time duration signal and a sinu-
soidal signal. Dividing the block of data into many short time
durations, the instantaneous frequency ^x at time tl is obtained
by minimizing the least square error summed/averaged over
the receivers,
Qð^xÞ¼
XN
j¼1
ðtlþD
tl
jPðr; zj; t0Þ/C0 Dj sinð^xt0 þ rjÞj2 dt0;
(A3)
where Pðr; zj; t0Þ is the narrowband time series for the jth re-
ceiver obtained by applying a narrowband ﬁlter to the
received data, and Dj and rj are unknown parameters to ﬁt
the data, which are time dependent. Having obtained the in-
stantaneous frequency ^xðtÞ’ xs /C0 k0/C22v /C0 k0 _~rðtÞ, one inte-
grates _~rðtÞ¼ xc /C0 ^xðtÞ=k0½/C138 /C0 /C22v over time to estimate the
phase distortion ~rðtÞ¼
Ðt
0
_~rðt0Þdt0. One then multiplies the
data of Eq. (A2) by eikm~rðtÞ to remove the phase distortion.
An alternative approach is to employ a phase locked
loop28 that estimates the phase compensation eikm ~rðtÞ /C17eihðtÞ
by minimizing the mean square error
MSE ¼
XN
j¼1
ðtlþD
tl
jPðr; zj; t0Þ/C0 Dj sinðxct0 þ hðtÞÞj2 dt0;
(A4)
where the desired signal is locked to the Doppler shifted fre-
quency xc.
1H. P. Bucker, “Use of calculated sound ﬁelds and matched-ﬁeld detection
to locate sound sources in shallow water,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 59,
368–373 (1976).
2A. B. Baggeroer, W. A. Kuperman, and P. N. Mikhalevsky, “An overview
of matched ﬁeld methods in ocean acoustics,” IEEE J. Ocean. Eng.18,
401–424 (1993).
3A. Tolstoy, Matched Field Processing for Underwater Acoustics(World
Scientiﬁc Publishing, Singapore, 1993), pp. 1–212.
4N. O. Booth, P. A. Baxley, J. A. Rice, P. W. Schey, W. S. Hodgkiss, G. L.
D’Spain, and J. J. Murray, “Source localization with broad-band matched-
ﬁeld processing in shallow water,” IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 21, 402–412
(1996).
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization 1229
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
--- page 13 ---
5M. D. Collins and W. A. Kuperman, “Focalization: Environmental focus-
ing and source localization,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 90, 1410–1422 (1991).
6H. S. Schmidt, A. B. Baggeroer, W. A. Kuperman, and E. K. Scheer,
“Environmentally tolerant beamforming for high-resolution matched ﬁeld
processing: Deterministic mismatch,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 73, 813–825
(1979).
7J. L. Krolik, “Matched-ﬁeld minimum variance beamforming in a random
ocean channel,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.92, 1408–1419 (1992).
8A. M. Richardson and L. W. Nolte, “A posteriori probability source local-
ization in an uncertain sound speed, deep ocean environment,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 89, 2280–2284 (1991).
9J. R. Buck, “Information theoretic bounds on source localization perform-
ance,” in Proceedings of the IEEE SAM Workshop, 2002.
10E. C. Shang, C. S. Clay, and Y. Y. Wang,. “Passive harmonic source rang-
ing in waveguides by using mode ﬁlter,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 78, 172–175
(1985).
11E. C. Shang, “Source depth estimation in waveguides,” J. Acoust. Soc.
Am.77, 1413–1418 (1985).
12T. C. Yang, “A method of range and depth estimation by modal decom-
position,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 82, 1736–1745 (1987).
13T. C. Yang, “Modal beamforming array gain,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85,
146–151 (1989).
14W. A. Kuperman, W. S. Hodgkiss, H. C. Song, T. Akal, C. Ferla, and D.
R. Jackson, “Phase conjugation in the ocean: Experimental demonstration
of an acoustic time-reversal mirror,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 103, 25–40
(1998), and references therein.
15P. D. Mourad, D. Rouseff, R. P. Porter, and A. Al-Kurd, “Source localiza-
tion using a reference wave to correct for oceanic variability,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 92, 1031–1039 (1992).
16M. Siderius, D. R. Jackson, D. Rouseff, and R. Porter, “Multipath compen-
sation in shallow water environments using a virtual receiver,” J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 102, 3439–3449 (1997).
17M. Thode, “Source ranging with minimal environmental information using
a virtual receiver and waveguide invariant theory,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
108, 1582–1594 (2000).
18B. Baggeroer, W. A. Kuperman, and H. Schmidt, “Matched ﬁeld process-
ing: Source localization in correlated noise as an optimum parameter esti-
mation problem,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 83, 571–587 (1988).
19G. V. Frisk and J. F. Lynch, “Shallow water waveguide characterization
using the Hankel transform,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 76, 205–216 (1984).
20G. V. Frisk, J. F. Lynch, and S. D. Rajan, “Determination of compres-
sional wave speed proﬁles using modal inverse techniques in a range-
dependent environment in Nantucket Sound,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 86,
1928–1939 (1989).
21K. Ohta and G. V. Frisk, “Model evolution and inversion for seabed geoa-
coustic properties in weakly range-dependent shallow-water waveguides,”
IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 22, 501–521 (1997).
22If the source is changing depth during the observation time, bm will be a
weight sum/integral of /m (zs). Mode depth function can still be estimated
from Eq. (12) without being affected by the source depth change.
23M. B. Porter, “The KRAKEN normal mode program,” Report No. SM-245,
SACLANT Undersea Research Center, La Spezia, Italy (1991).
24Note that the estimation of the mode wavenumbers and depth functions
are not affected by the initial range. The initial ranger0 enters only in the
variable bm in Eq. (13), which is removed by normalization as shown in
Eq. (14).
25F. B. Jensen, W. A. Kuperman, M. B. Porter, and H. Schmidt,
Computational Ocean Acoustics, (Springer, New York, 2011), Chaps.
5.9.2. and 2.5.2.
26D. M. F. Chapman and Dale D. Ellis, “The group velocity of normal mod-
es,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.74, 973–979 (1983).
27S. C. Walker, P. Roux and W. A. Kuperman, “Modal Doppler theory of an
arbitrarily accelerating continuous-wave source applied to mode extraction
in the oceanic waveguide,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 122, 1426–1439 (2007).
28J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed. (McGraw-Hill, New York,
2001), Sec. 6.2.2.
29K. M. Becker and G. V. Frisk, “Evaluation of an autoregressive spectral
estimator for modal wave number estimation in range-dependent
shallow water waveguides,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am.120, 1423–1434,
(2006), and references therein.
1230 J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 135, No. 3, March 2014 T. C. Y ang: Data-based source localization
 Redistribution subject to ASA license or copyright; see http://acousticalsociety.org/content/terms. Download to IP:  84.55.60.68 On: Wed, 23 Apr 2014 18:19:17
